_The Last Work_.

Jane Austen was taken from us: how much unexhausted talent perished with
her, how largely she might yet have contributed to the entertainment of
her readers, if her life had been prolonged, cannot be known; but it is
certain that the mine at which she had so long laboured was not worked
out, and that she was still diligently employed in collecting fresh
materials from it.  'Persuasion' had been finished in August 1816; some
time was probably given to correcting it for the press; but on the 27th
of the following January, according to the date on her own manuscript,
she began a new novel, and worked at it up to the 17th of March.  The
chief part of this manuscript is written in her usual firm and neat hand,
but some of the latter pages seem to have been first traced in pencil,
probably when she was too weak to sit long at her desk, and written over
in ink afterwards.  The quantity produced does not indicate any decline
of power or industry, for in those seven weeks twelve chapters had been
completed.  It is more difficult to judge of the quality of a work so
little advanced.  It had received no name; there was scarcely any
indication what the course of the story was to be, nor was any heroine
yet perceptible, who, like Fanny Price, or Anne Elliot, might draw round
her the sympathies of the reader.  Such an unfinished fragment cannot be
presented to the public; but I am persuaded that some of Jane Austen's
admirers will be glad to learn something about the latest creations which
were forming themselves in her mind; and therefore, as some of the
principal characters were already sketched in with a vigorous hand, I
will try to give an idea of them, illustrated by extracts from the work.

The scene is laid at Sanditon, a village on the Sussex coast, just
struggling into notoriety as a bathing-place, under the patronage of the
two principal proprietors of the parish, Mr. Parker and Lady Denham.

Mr. Parker was an amiable man, with more enthusiasm than judgment, whose
somewhat shallow mind overflowed with the one idea of the prosperity of
Sanditon, together with a jealous contempt of the rival village of
Brinshore, where a similar attempt was going on.  To the regret of his
much-enduring wife, he had left his family mansion, with all its
ancestral comforts of gardens, shrubberies, and shelter, situated in a
valley some miles inland, and had built a new residence--a Trafalgar
House--on the bare brow of the hill overlooking Sanditon and the sea,
exposed to every wind that blows; but he will confess to no discomforts,
nor suffer his family to feel any from the change.  The following extract
brings him before the reader, mounted on his hobby:--

'He wanted to secure the promise of a visit, and to get as many of the
family as his own house would hold to follow him to Sanditon as soon as
possible; and, healthy as all the Heywoods undeniably were, he foresaw
that every one of them would be benefitted by the sea.  He held it indeed
as certain that no person, however upheld for the present by fortuitous
aids of exercise and spirit in a semblance of health, could be really in
a state of secure and permanent health without spending at least six
weeks by the sea every year.  The sea air and sea-bathing together were
nearly infallible; one or other of them being a match for every disorder
of the stomach, the lungs, or the blood.  They were anti-spasmodic, anti-
pulmonary, anti-bilious, and anti-rheumatic.  Nobody could catch cold by
the sea; nobody wanted appetite by the sea; nobody wanted spirits; nobody
wanted strength.  They were healing, softening, relaxing, fortifying, and
bracing, seemingly just as was wanted; sometimes one, sometimes the
other.  If the sea breeze failed, the sea-bath was the certain
corrective; and when bathing disagreed, the sea breeze was evidently
designed by nature for the cure.  His eloquence, however, could not
prevail.  Mr. and Mrs. Heywood never left home. . . .  The maintenance,
education, and fitting out of fourteen children demanded a very quiet,
settled, careful course of life; and obliged them to be stationary and
healthy at Willingden.  What prudence had at first enjoined was now
rendered pleasant by habit.  They never left home, and they had a
gratification in saying so.'

Lady Denham's was a very different character.  She was a rich vulgar
widow, with a sharp but narrow mind, who cared for the prosperity of
Sanditon only so far as it might increase the value of her own property.
She is thus described:--

'Lady Denham had been a rich Miss Brereton, born to wealth, but not to
education.  Her first husband had been a Mr. Hollis, a man of
considerable property in the country, of which a large share of the
parish of Sanditon, with manor and mansion-house, formed a part.  He had
been an elderly man when she married him; her own age about thirty.  Her
motives for such a match could be little understood at the distance of
forty years, but she had so well nursed and pleased Mr. Hollis that at
his death he left her everything--all his estates, and all at her
disposal.  After a widowhood of some years she had been induced to marry
again.  The late Sir Harry Denham, of Denham Park, in the neighbourhood
of Sanditon, succeeded in removing her and her large income to his own
domains; but he could not succeed in the views of permanently enriching
his family which were attributed to him.  She had been too wary to put
anything out of her own power, and when, on Sir Harry's death, she
returned again to her own house at Sanditon, she was said to have made
this boast, "that though she had _got_ nothing but her title from the
family, yet she had _given_ nothing for it."  For the title it was to be
supposed that she married.

'Lady Denham was indeed a great lady, beyond the common wants of society;
for she had many thousands a year to bequeath, and three distinct sets of
people to be courted by:--her own relations, who might very reasonably
wish for her original thirty thousand pounds among them; the legal heirs
of Mr. Hollis, who might hope to be more indebted to _her_ sense of
justice than he had allowed them to be to _his_; and those members of the
Denham family for whom her second husband had hoped to make a good
bargain.  By all these, or by branches of them, she had, no doubt, been
long and still continued to be well attacked; and of these three
divisions Mr. Parker did not hesitate to say that Mr. Hollis's kindred
were the least in favour, and Sir Harry Denham's the most. The former, he
believed, had done themselves irremediable harm by expressions of very
unwise resentment at the time of Mr. Hollis's death: the latter, to the
advantage of being the remnant of a connection which she certainly
valued, joined those of having been known to her from their childhood,
and of being always at hand to pursue their interests by seasonable
attentions.  But another claimant was now to be taken into account: a
young female relation whom Lady Denham had been induced to receive into
her family.  After having always protested against any such addition, and
often enjoyed the repeated defeat she had given to every attempt of her
own relations to introduce 'this young lady, or that young lady,' as a
companion at Sanditon House, she had brought back with her from London
last Michaelmas a Miss Clara Brereton, who bid fair to vie in favour with
Sir Edward Denham, and to secure for herself and her family that share of
the accumulated property which they had certainly the best right to
inherit.'

Lady Denham's character comes out in a conversation which takes place at
Mr. Parker's tea-table.

'The conversation turned entirely upon Sanditon, its present number of
visitants, and the chances of a good season.  It was evident that Lady
Denham had more anxiety, more fears of loss than her coadjutor.  She
wanted to have the place fill faster, and seemed to have many harassing
apprehensions of the lodgings being in some instances underlet.  To a
report that a large boarding-school was expected she replies, 'Ah, well,
no harm in that.  They will stay their six weeks, and out of such a
number who knows but some may be consumptive, and want asses' milk; and I
have two milch asses at this very time.  But perhaps the little Misses
may hurt the furniture.  I hope they will have a good sharp governess to
look after them.'  But she wholly disapproved of Mr. Parker's wish to
secure the residence of a medical man amongst them.  'Why, what should we
do with a doctor here?  It would only be encouraging our servants and the
poor to fancy themselves ill, if there was a doctor at hand.  Oh, pray
let us have none of that tribe at Sanditon: we go on very well as we are.
There is the sea, and the downs, and my milch asses: and I have told Mrs.
Whitby that if anybody enquires for a chamber horse, they may be supplied
at a fair rate (poor Mr. Hollis's chamber horse, as good as new); and
what can people want more?  I have lived seventy good years in the world,
and never took physic, except twice: and never saw the face of a doctor
in all my life on my own account; and I really believe if my poor dear
Sir Harry had never seen one neither, he would have been alive now.  Ten
fees, one after another, did the men take who sent him out of the world.
I beseech you, Mr. Parker, no doctors here.'

This lady's character comes out more strongly in a conversation with Mr.
Parker's guest, Miss Charlotte Heywood.  Sir Edward Denham with his
sister Esther and Clara Brereton have just left them.

'Charlotte accepted an invitation from Lady Denham to remain with her on
the terrace, when the others adjourned to the library.  Lady Denham, like
a true great lady, talked, and talked only of her own concerns, and
Charlotte listened.  Taking hold of Charlotte's arm with the ease of one
who felt that any notice from her was a favour, and communicative from
the same sense of importance, or from a natural love of talking, she
immediately said in a tone of great satisfaction, and with a look of arch
sagacity:--

'Miss Esther wants me to invite her and her brother to spend a week with
me at Sanditon House, as I did last summer, but I shan't.  She has been
trying to get round me every way with her praise of this and her praise
of that; but I saw what she was about.  I saw through it all.  I am not
very easily taken in, my dear.'

Charlotte could think of nothing more harmless to be said than the simple
enquiry of, 'Sir Edward and Miss Denham?'

'Yes, my dear; _my young folks_, as I call them, sometimes: for I take
them very much by the hand, and had them with me last summer, about this
time, for a week--from Monday to Monday--and very delighted and thankful
they were.  For they are very good young people, my dear.  I would not
have you think that I only notice them for poor dear Sir Harry's sake.
No, no; they are very deserving themselves, or, trust me, they would not
be so much in my company.  I am not the woman to help anybody blindfold.
I always take care to know what I am about, and who I have to deal with
before I stir a finger.  I do not think I was ever overreached in my
life; and that is a good deal for a woman to say that has been twice
married.  Poor dear Sir Harry (between ourselves) thought at first to
have got more, but (with a bit of a sigh) he is gone, and we must not
find fault with the dead.  Nobody could live happier together than us:
and he was a very honourable man, quite the gentleman, of ancient family;
and when he died I gave Sir Edward his gold watch.'

This was said with a look at her companion which implied its right to
produce a great impression; and seeing no rapturous astonishment in
Charlotte's countenance, she added quickly,

'He did not bequeath it to his nephew, my dear; it was no bequest; it was
not in the will.  He only told me, and _that_ but _once_, that he should
wish his nephew to have his watch; but it need not have been binding, if
I had not chose it.'

'Very kind indeed, very handsome!' said Charlotte, absolutely forced to
affect admiration.

'Yes, my dear; and it is not the only kind thing I have done by him.  I
have been a very liberal friend to Sir Edward; and, poor young man, he
needs it bad enough.  For, though I am only the dowager, my dear, and he
is the heir, things do not stand between us in the way they usually do
between those two parties.  Not a shilling do I receive from the Denham
estate.  Sir Edward has no payments to make _me_.  _He_ don't stand
uppermost, believe me; it is _I_ that help _him_.'

'Indeed! he is a very fine young man, and particularly elegant in his
address.'

This was said chiefly for the sake of saying something; but Charlotte
directly saw that it was laying her open to suspicion, by Lady Denham's
giving a shrewd glance at her, and replying,

'Yes, yes; he's very well to look at; and it is to be hoped that somebody
of large fortune will think so; for Sir Edward _must_ marry for money.  He
and I often talk that matter over.  A handsome young man like him will go
smirking and smiling about, and paying girls compliments, but he knows he
_must_ marry for money.  And Sir Edward is a very steady young man, in
the main, and has got very good notions.'

'Sir Edward Denham,' said Charlotte, 'with such personal advantages, may
be almost sure of getting a woman of fortune, if he chooses it.'

This glorious sentiment seemed quite to remove suspicion.

'Aye, my dear, that is very sensibly said; and if we could but get a
young heiress to Sanditon!  But heiresses are monstrous scarce!  I do not
think we have had an heiress here, nor even a _Co_., since Sanditon has
been a public place.  Families come after families, but, as far as I can
learn, it is not one in a hundred of them that have any real property,
landed or funded.  An income, perhaps, but no property.  Clergymen, may
be, or lawyers from town, or half-pay officers, or widows with only a
jointure; and what good can such people do to anybody?  Except just as
they take our empty houses, and (between ourselves) I think they are
great fools for not staying at home.  Now, if we could get a young
heiress to be sent here for her health, and, as soon as she got well,
have her fall in love with Sir Edward!  And Miss Esther must marry
somebody of fortune, too.  She must get a rich husband.  Ah! young ladies
that have no money are very much to be pitied.'  After a short pause: 'If
Miss Esther thinks to talk me into inviting them to come and stay at
Sanditon House, she will find herself mistaken.  Matters are altered with
me since last summer, you know: I have Miss Clara with me now, which
makes a great difference.  I should not choose to have my two housemaid's
time taken up all the morning in dusting out bedrooms.  They have Miss
Clara's room to put to rights, as well as mine, every day.  If they had
hard work, they would want higher wages.'

Charlotte's feelings were divided between amusement and indignation.  She
kept her countenance, and kept a civil silence; but without attempting to
listen any longer, and only conscious that Lady Denham was still talking
in the same way, allowed her own thoughts to form themselves into such
meditation as this:--'She is thoroughly mean; I had no expectation of
anything so bad.  Mr. Parker spoke too mildly of her.  He is too kind-
hearted to see clearly, and their very connection misleads him.  He has
persuaded her to engage in the same speculation, and because they have so
far the same object in view, he fancies that she feels like him in other
things; but she is very, very mean.  I can see no good in her.  Poor Miss
Brereton!  And it makes everybody mean about her.  This poor Sir Edward
and his sister! how far nature meant them to be respectable I cannot
tell; but they are obliged to be mean in their servility to her; and I am
mean, too, in giving her my attention with the appearance of coinciding
with her.  Thus it is when rich people are sordid.'

Mr. Parker has two unmarried sisters of singular character.  They live
together; Diana, the younger, always takes the lead, and the elder
follows in the same track.  It is their pleasure to fancy themselves
invalids to a degree and in a manner never experienced by others; but,
from a state of exquisite pain and utter prostration, Diana Parker can
always rise to be officious in the concerns of all her acquaintance, and
to make incredible exertions where they are not wanted.

It would seem that they must be always either very busy for the good of
others, or else extremely ill themselves.  Some natural delicacy of
constitution, in fact, with an unfortunate turn for medicine, especially
quack medicine, had given them an early tendency at various times to
various disorders.  The rest of their suffering was from their own fancy,
the love of distinction, and the love of the wonderful.  They had
charitable hearts and many amiable feelings; but a spirit of restless
activity, and the glory of doing more than anybody else, had a share in
every exertion of benevolence, and there was vanity in all they did, as
well as in all they endured.

These peculiarities come out in the following letter of Diana Parker to
her brother:--

   'MY DEAR TOM,--We were much grieved at your accident, and if you had
   not described yourself as having fallen into such very good hands, I
   should have been with you at all hazards the day after receipt of your
   letter, though it found me suffering under a more severe attack than
   usual of my old grievance, spasmodic bile, and hardly able to crawl
   from my bed to the sofa.  But how were you treated?  Send me more
   particulars in your next.  If indeed a simple sprain, as you
   denominate it, nothing would have been so judicious as
   friction--friction by the hand alone, supposing it could be applied
   _immediately_.  Two years ago I happened to be calling on Mrs.
   Sheldon, when her coachman sprained his foot, as he was cleaning the
   carriage, and could hardly limp into the house; but by the immediate
   use of friction alone, steadily persevered in (I rubbed his ancle with
   my own hands for four hours without intermission), he was well in
   three days. . . .  Pray never run into peril again in looking for an
   apothecary on our account; for had you the most experienced man in his
   line settled at Sanditon, it would be no recommendation to us.  We
   have entirely done with the whole medical tribe.  We have consulted
   physician after physician in vain, till we are quite convinced that
   they can do nothing for us, and that we must trust to our knowledge of
   our own wretched constitutions for any relief; but if you think it
   advisable for the interests of the _place_ to get a medical man there,
   I will undertake the commission with pleasure, and have no doubt of
   succeeding.  I could soon put the necessary irons in the fire.  As for
   getting to Sanditon myself, it is an impossibility.  I grieve to say
   that I cannot attempt it, but my feelings tell me too plainly that in
   my present state the sea-air would probably be the death of me; and in
   truth I doubt whether Susan's nerves would be equal to the effort.  She
   has been suffering much from headache, and six leeches a day, for ten
   days together, relieved her so little that we thought it right to
   change our measures; and being convinced on examination that much of
   the evil lay in her gums, I persuaded her to attack the disorder
   there.  She has accordingly had three teeth drawn, and is decidedly
   better; but her nerves are a good deal deranged, she can only speak in
   a whisper, and fainted away this morning on poor Arthur's trying to
   suppress a cough.'

Within a week of the date of this letter, in spite of the impossibility
of moving, and of the fatal effects to be apprehended from the sea-air,
Diana Parker was at Sanditon with her sister.  She had flattered herself
that by her own indefatigable exertions, and by setting at work the
agency of many friends, she had induced two large families to take houses
at Sanditon.  It was to expedite these politic views that she came; and
though she met with some disappointment of her expectation, yet she did
not suffer in health.

Such were some of the _dramatis personae_, ready dressed and prepared for
their parts.  They are at least original and unlike any that the author
had produced before.  The success of the piece must have depended on the
skill with which these parts might be played; but few will be inclined to
distrust the skill of one who had so often succeeded.  If the author had
lived to complete her work, it is probable that these personages might
have grown into as mature an individuality of character, and have taken
as permanent a place amongst our familiar acquaintance, as Mr. Bennet, or
John Thorp, Mary Musgrove, or Aunt Norris herself.