CASTLE SQUARE, October 13.

MY DEAREST CASSANDRA,--I have received your letter, and with most
melancholy anxiety was it expected, for the sad news[6] reached us last
night, but without any particulars. It came in a short letter to Martha
from her sister, begun at Steventon and finished in Winchester.

We have felt, we do feel, for you all, as you will not need to be
told,--for you, for Fanny, for Henry, for Lady Bridges, and for dearest
Edward, whose loss and whose sufferings seem to make those of every
other person nothing. God be praised that you can say what you do of
him: that he has a religious mind to bear him up, and a disposition that
will gradually lead him to comfort.

My dear, dear Fanny, I am so thankful that she has you with her! You
will be everything to her; you will give her all the consolation that
human aid can give. May the Almighty sustain you all, and keep you, my
dearest Cassandra, well; but for the present I dare say you are equal to
everything.

You will know that the poor boys are at Steventon. Perhaps it is best
for them, as they will have more means of exercise and amusement there
than they could have with us, but I own myself disappointed by the
arrangement. I should have loved to have them with me at such a time. I
shall write to Edward by this post.

We shall, of course, hear from you again very soon, and as often as you
can write. We will write as you desire, and I shall add Bookham.
Hamstall, I suppose, you write to yourselves, as you do not mention it.

What a comfort that Mrs. Deedes is saved from present misery and alarm!
But it will fall heavy upon poor Harriot; and as for Lady B., but that
her fortitude does seem truly great, I should fear the effect of such a
blow, and so unlooked for. I long to hear more of you all. Of Henry's
anguish I think with grief and solicitude; but he will exert himself to
be of use and comfort.

With what true sympathy our feelings are shared by Martha you need not
be told; she is the friend and sister under every circumstance.

We need not enter into a panegyric on the departed, but it is sweet to
think of her great worth, of her solid principles, of her true devotion,
her excellence in every relation of life. It is also consolatory to
reflect on the shortness of the sufferings which led her from this world
to a better.

Farewell for the present, my dearest sister. Tell Edward that we feel
for him and pray for him.

                                    Yours affectionately,
                                                      J. AUSTEN.

I will write to Catherine.

Perhaps you can give me some directions about mourning.

  Miss AUSTEN, EDWARD AUSTEN'S, Esq.,
    Godmersham Park, Faversham, Kent.