STEVENTON, Saturday (October 27).

MY DEAR CASSANDRA,--Your letter was a most agreeable surprise to me
to-day, and I have taken a long sheet of paper to show my gratitude.

We arrived here yesterday between four and five, but I cannot send you
quite so triumphant an account of our last day's journey as of the
first and second. Soon after I had finished my letter from Staines, my
mother began to suffer from the exercise or fatigue of travelling, and
she was a good deal indisposed. She had not a very good night at
Staines, but bore her journey better than I had expected, and at
Basingstoke, where we stopped more than half an hour, received much
comfort from a mess of broth and the sight of Mr. Lyford, who
recommended her to take twelve drops of laudanum when she went to bed as
a composer, which she accordingly did.

James called on us just as we were going to tea, and my mother was well
enough to talk very cheerfully to him before she went to bed. James
seems to have taken to his old trick of coming to Steventon in spite of
Mary's reproaches, for he was here before breakfast and is now paying us
a second visit. They were to have dined here to-day, but the weather is
too bad. I have had the pleasure of hearing that Martha is with them.
James fetched her from Ibthorp on Thursday, and she will stay with them
till she removes to Kintbury.

We met with no adventures at all in our journey yesterday, except that
our trunk had once nearly slipped off, and we were obliged to stop at
Hartley to have our wheels greased.

Whilst my mother and Mr. Lyford were together I went to Mrs. Ryder's and
bought what I intended to buy, but not in much perfection. There were
no narrow braces for children, and scarcely any notting silk; but Miss
Wood, as usual, is going to town very soon, and will lay in a fresh
stock. I gave 2_s._ 3_d._ a yard for my flannel, and I fancy it is not
very good, but it is so disgraceful and contemptible an article in
itself that its being comparatively good or bad is of little importance.
I bought some Japan ink likewise, and next week shall begin my
operations on my hat, on which you know my principal hopes of happiness
depend.

I am very grand indeed; I had the dignity of dropping out my mother's
laudanum last night. I carry about the keys of the wine and closet, and
twice since I began this letter have had orders to give in the kitchen.
Our dinner was very good yesterday, and the chicken boiled perfectly
tender; therefore I shall not be obliged to dismiss Nanny on that
account.

Almost everything was unpacked and put away last night. Nanny chose to
do it, and I was not sorry to be busy. I have unpacked the gloves, and
placed yours in your drawer. Their color is light and pretty, and I
believe exactly what we fixed on.

Your letter was chaperoned here by one from Mrs. Cooke, in which she
says that "Battleridge" is not to come out before January, and she is so
little satisfied with Cawthorn's dilatoriness that she never means to
employ him again.

Mrs. Hall, of Sherborne, was brought to bed yesterday of a dead child,
some weeks before she expected, owing to a fright. I suppose she
happened unawares to look at her husband.

There has been a great deal of rain here for this last fortnight, much
more than in Kent, and indeed we found the roads all the way from
Staines most disgracefully dirty. Steventon lane has its full share of
it, and I don't know when I shall be able to get to Deane.

I hear that Martha is in better looks and spirits than she has enjoyed
for a long time, and I flatter myself she will now be able to jest
openly about Mr. W.

The spectacles which Molly found are my mother's, the scissors my
father's. We are very glad to hear such a good account of your patients,
little and great. My dear itty Dordy's remembrance of me is very
pleasing to me,--foolishly pleasing, because I know it will be over so
soon. My attachment to him will be more durable. I shall think with
tenderness and delight on his beautiful and smiling countenance and
interesting manner until a few years have turned him into an
ungovernable, ungracious fellow.

The books from Winton are all unpacked and put away; the binding has
compressed them most conveniently, and there is now very good room in
the bookcase for all that we wish to have there. I believe the servants
were very glad to see us Nanny was, I am sure. She confesses that it
was very dull, and yet she had her child with her till last Sunday. I
understand that there are some grapes left, but I believe not many; they
must be gathered as soon as possible, or this rain will entirely rot
them.

I am quite angry with myself for not writing closer; why is my alphabet
so much more sprawly than yours? Dame Tilbury's daughter has lain in.
Shall I give her any of your baby clothes? The laceman was here only a
few days ago. How unfortunate for both of us that he came so soon! Dame
Bushell washes for us only one week more, as Sukey has got a place. John
Steevens' wife undertakes our purification. She does not look as if
anything she touched would ever be clean, but who knows? We do not seem
likely to have any other maidservant at present, but Dame Staples will
supply the place of one. Mary has hired a young girl from Ashe who has
never been out to service to be her scrub, but James fears her not being
strong enough for the place.

Earle Harwood has been to Deane lately, as I think Mary wrote us word,
and his family then told him that they would receive his wife, if she
continued to behave well for another year. He was very grateful, as well
he might; their behavior throughout the whole affair has been
particularly kind. Earle and his wife live in the most private manner
imaginable at Portsmouth, without keeping a servant of any kind. What a
prodigious innate love of virtue she must have, to marry under such
circumstances!

It is now Saturday evening, but I wrote the chief of this in the
morning. My mother has not been down at all to-day; the laudanum made
her sleep a good deal, and upon the whole I think she is better. My
father and I dined by ourselves. How strange! He and John Bond are now
very happy together, for I have just heard the heavy step of the latter
along the passage.

James Digweed called to-day, and I gave him his brother's deputation.
Charles Harwood, too, has just called to ask how we are, in his way from
Dummer, whither he has been conveying Miss Garrett, who is going to
return to her former residence in Kent. I will leave off, or I shall not
have room to add a word to-morrow.

_Sunday._--My mother has had a very good night, and feels much better
to-day.

I have received my aunt's letter, and thank you for your scrap. I will
write to Charles soon. Pray give Fanny and Edward a kiss from me, and
ask George if he has got a new song for me. 'Tis really very kind of my
aunt to ask us to Bath again; a kindness that deserves a better return
than to profit by it.

                                                 Yours ever,      J. A.

  Miss AUSTEN,
    Godmersham Park, Faversham, Kent.