GODMERSHAM, Wednesday (June 15, 1808).

MY DEAR CASSANDRA,--Where shall I begin? Which of all my important
nothings shall I tell you first? At half after seven yesterday morning
Henry saw us into our own carriage, and we drove away from the Bath
Hotel; which, by the by, had been found most uncomfortable
quarters,--very dirty, very noisy, and very ill-provided. James began
his journey by the coach at five. Our first eight miles were hot;
Deptford Hill brought to my mind our hot journey into Kent fourteen
years ago; but after Blackheath we suffered nothing, and as the day
advanced it grew quite cool. At Dartford, which we reached within the
two hours and three-quarters, we went to the Bull, the same inn at
which we breakfasted in that said journey, and on the present occasion
had about the same bad butter.

At half-past ten we were again off, and, travelling on without any
adventure reached Sittingbourne by three. Daniel was watching for us at
the door of the George, and I was acknowledged very kindly by Mr. and
Mrs. Marshall, to the latter of whom I devoted my conversation, while
Mary went out to buy some gloves. A few minutes, of course, did for
Sittingbourne; and so off we drove, drove, drove, and by six o'clock
were at Godmersham.

Our two brothers were walking before the house as we approached, as
natural as life. Fanny and Lizzy met us in the Hall with a great deal of
pleasant joy; we went for a few minutes into the breakfast-parlor, and
then proceeded to our rooms. Mary has the Hall chamber. I am in the
Yellow room--very literally--for I am writing in it at this moment. It
seems odd to me to have such a great place all to myself, and to be at
Godmersham without you is also odd.

You are wished for, I assure you: Fanny, who came to me as soon as she
had seen her Aunt James to her room, and stayed while I dressed, was as
energetic as usual in her longings for you. She is grown both in height
and size since last year, but not immoderately, looks very well, and
seems as to conduct and manner just what she was and what one could wish
her to continue.

Elizabeth,[5] who was dressing when we arrived, came to me for a minute
attended by Marianne, Charles, and Louisa, and, you will not doubt, gave
me a very affectionate welcome. That I had received such from Edward
also I need not mention; but I do, you see, because it is a pleasure. I
never saw him look in better health, and Fanny says he is perfectly
well. I cannot praise Elizabeth's looks, but they are probably affected
by a cold. Her little namesake has gained in beauty in the last three
years, though not all that Marianne has lost. Charles is not quite so
lovely as he was. Louisa is much as I expected, and Cassandra I find
handsomer than I expected, though at present disguised by such a violent
breaking-out that she does not come down after dinner. She has charming
eyes and a nice open countenance, and seems likely to be very lovable.
Her size is magnificent.

I was agreeably surprised to find Louisa Bridges still here. She looks
remarkably well (legacies are very wholesome diet), and is just what she
always was. John is at Sandling. You may fancy our dinner-party
therefore; Fanny, of course, belonging to it, and little Edward, for
that day. He was almost too happy, his happiness at least made him too
talkative.

It has struck ten; I must go to breakfast.

Since breakfast I have had a _tête-à-tête_ with Edward in his room; he
wanted to know James's plans and mine, and from what his own now are I
think it already nearly certain that I shall return when they do, though
not with them. Edward will be going about the same time to Alton, where
he has business with Mr. Trimmer, and where he means his son should join
him; and I shall probably be his companion to that place, and get on
afterwards somehow or other.

I should have preferred a rather longer stay here certainly, but there
is no prospect of any later conveyance for me, as he does not mean to
accompany Edward on his return to Winchester, from a very natural
unwillingness to leave Elizabeth at that time. I shall at any rate be
glad not to be obliged to be an incumbrance on those who have brought me
here, for, as James has no horse, I must feel in their carriage that I
am taking his place. We were rather crowded yesterday, though it does
not become me to say so, as I and my boa were of the party, and it is
not to be supposed but that a child of three years of age was fidgety.

I need scarcely beg you to keep all this to yourself, lest it should get
round by Anna's means. She is very kindly inquired after by her friends
here, who all regret her not coming with her father and mother.

I left Henry, I hope, free from his tiresome complaint, in other
respects well, and thinking with great pleasure of Cheltenham and
Stoneleigh.

The brewery scheme is quite at an end: at a meeting of the subscribers
last week it was by general, and I believe very hearty, consent
dissolved.

The country is very beautiful. I saw as much as ever to admire in my
yesterday's journey. . . .