STEVENTON, Wednesday (January 21).

EXPECT a most agreeable letter, for not being overburdened with subject
(having nothing at all to say), I shall have no check to my genius from
beginning to end.

Well, and so Prank's letter has made you very happy, but you are afraid
he would not have patience to stay for the "Haarlem," which you wish him
to have done as being safer than the merchantman. Poor fellow! to wait
from the middle of November to the end of December, and perhaps even
longer, it must be sad work; especially in a place where the ink is so
abominably pale. What a surprise to him it must have been on October 20,
to be visited, collared, and thrust out of the "Petterel" by Captain
Inglis. He kindly passes over the poignancy of his feelings in quitting
his ship, his officers, and his men.

What a pity it is that he should not be in England at the time of this
promotion, because he certainly would have had an appointment, so
everybody says, and therefore it must be right for me to say it too. Had
he been really here, the certainty of the appointment, I dare say, would
not have been half so great, but as it could not be brought to the
proof, his absence will be always a lucky source of regret.

Eliza talks of having read in a newspaper that all the first lieutenants
of the frigates whose captains were to be sent into line-of-battle ships
were to be promoted to the rank of commanders. If it be true, Mr.
Valentine may afford himself a fine Valentine's knot, and Charles may
perhaps become first of the "Endymion," though I suppose Captain Durham
is too likely to bring a villain with him under that denomination. . . .

The neighborhood have quite recovered the death of Mrs. Rider,--so much
so, that I think they are rather rejoiced at it now; her things were so
very dear! and Mrs. Rogers is to be all that is desirable. Not even
death itself can fix the friendship of the world. . . .

The Wylmots being robbed must be an amusing thing to their acquaintance,
and I hope it is as much their pleasure as it seems their avocation to
be subjects of general entertainment.

I have a great mind not to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, which
I have just had the pleasure of reading, because I am so ashamed to
compare the sprawling lines of this with it. But if I say all that I
have to say, I hope I have no reason to hang myself. . . .

Why did not J. D. make his proposals to you? I suppose he went to see
the cathedral, that he might know how he should like to be married in
it. . . .

  Miss AUSTEN,
    Godmersham Park, Faversham, Kent.