23 HANS PLACE, Tuesday morning (August, 1814).

MY DEAR CASSANDRA,--I had a very good journey, not crowded, two of the
three taken up at Bentley being children, the others of a reasonable
size; and they were all very quiet and civil. We were late in London,
from being a great load, and from changing coaches at Farnham; it was
nearly four, I believe, when we reached Sloane Street. Henry himself met
me, and as soon as my trunk and basket could be routed out from all the
other trunks and baskets in the world, we were on our way to Hans Place
in the luxury of a nice, large, cool, dirty hackney coach.

There were four in the kitchen part of Yalden, and I was told fifteen at
top, among them Percy Benn. We met in the same room at Egham, but poor
Percy was not in his usual spirits. He would be more chatty, I dare say,
in his way from Woolwich. We took up a young Gibson at Holybourn, and,
in short, everybody either did come up by Yalden yesterday, or wanted to
come up. It put me in mind of my own coach between Edinburgh and
Stirling.

Henry is very well, and has given me an account of the Canterbury races,
which seem to have been as pleasant as one could wish. Everything went
well. Fanny had good partners, Mr. ---- was her second on Thursday, but
he did not dance with her any more.

This will content you for the present. I must just add, however, that
there were no Lady Charlottes, they were gone off to Kirby, and that
Mary Oxenden, instead of dying, is going to marry Wm. Hammond.

No James and Edward yet. Our evening yesterday was perfectly quiet; we
only talked a little to Mr. Tilson across the intermediate gardens; she
was gone out airing with Miss Burdett. It is a delightful place,--more
than answers my expectation. Having got rid of my unreasonable ideas, I
find more space and comfort in the rooms than I had supposed, and the
garden is quite a love. I am in the front attic, which is the bedchamber
to be preferred.

Henry wants you to see it all, and asked whether you would return with
him from Hampshire; I encouraged him to think you would. He breakfasts
here early, and then rides to Henrietta St. If it continues fine, John
is to drive me there by and by, and we shall take an airing together;
and I do not mean to take any other exercise, for I feel a little tired
after my long jumble. I live in his room downstairs; it is particularly
pleasant from opening upon the garden. I go and refresh myself every now
and then, and then come back to solitary coolness. There is one
maidservant only, a very creditable, clean-looking young woman. Richard
remains for the present.

_Wednesday morning._--My brother and Edwd. arrived last night. They
could not get places the day before. Their business is about teeth and
wigs, and they are going after breakfast to Scarman's and Tavistock St.,
and they are to return to go with me afterwards in the barouche. I hope
to do some of my errands to-day.

I got the willow yesterday, as Henry was not quite ready when I reached
Hena. St. I saw Mr. Hampson there for a moment. He dines here to-morrow,
and proposed bringing his son; so I must submit to seeing George
Hampson, though I had hoped to go through life without it. It was one of
my vanities, like your not reading "Patronage."

After leaving H. St. we drove to Mrs. Latouche's; they are always at
home, and they are to dine here on Friday. We could do no more, as it
began to rain.

We dine at half-past four to-day, that our visitors may go to the play,
and Henry and I are to spend the evening with the Tilsons, to meet Miss
Burnett, who leaves town to-morrow. Mrs. T. called on me yesterday.

Is not this all that can have happened or been arranged? Not quite.
Henry wants me to see more of his Hanwell favorite, and has written to
invite her to spend a day or two here with me. His scheme is to fetch
her on Saturday. I am more and more convinced that he will marry again
soon, and like the idea of her better than of anybody else at hand.

Now I have breakfasted and have the room to myself again. It is likely
to be a fine day. How do you all do?

Henry talks of being at Chawton about the 1st of Sept. He has once
mentioned a scheme which I should rather like,--calling on the Birches
and the Crutchleys in our way. It may never come to anything, but I must
provide for the possibility by troubling you to send up my silk pelisse
by Collier on Saturday. I feel it would be necessary on such an
occasion; and be so good as to put up a clean dressing-gown which will
come from the wash on Friday. You need not direct it to be left
anywhere. It may take its chance.

We are to call for Henry between three and four, and I must finish this
and carry it with me, as he is not always there in the morning before
the parcel is made up. And before I set off, I must return Mrs. Tilson's
visit. I hear nothing of the Hoblyns, and abstain from all inquiry.

I hope Mary Jane and Frank's gardens go on well. Give my love to them
all--Nunna Hat's love to George. A great many people wanted to run up in
the Poach as well as me. The wheat looked very well all the way, and
James says the same of _his_ road.

The same good account of Mrs. C.'s health continues, and her
circumstances mend. She gets farther and farther from poverty. What a
comfort! Good-by to you.

                      Yours very truly and affectionately,
                                                        JANE.

All well at Steventon. I hear nothing particular of Ben, except that
Edward is to get him some pencils.

  Miss AUSTEN, Chawton.
    By favor of Mr. GRAY.