HANS PLACE, Saturday (Dec. 2).

MY DEAR CASSANDRA,--Henry came back yesterday, and might have returned
the day before if he had known as much in time. I had the pleasure of
hearing from Mr. T. on Wednesday night that Mr. Seymour thought there
was not the least occasion for his absenting himself any longer.

I had also the comfort of a few lines on Wednesday morning from Henry
himself, just after your letter was gone, giving so good an account of
his feelings as made me perfectly easy. He met with the utmost care and
attention at Hanwell, spent his two days there very quietly and
pleasantly, and being certainly in no respect the worse for going, we
may believe that he must be better, as he is quite sure of being
himself. To make his return a complete gala, Mr. Haden was secured for
dinner. I need not say that our evening was agreeable.

But you seem to be under a mistake as to Mr. H. You call him an
apothecary. He is no apothecary; he has never been an apothecary; there
is not an apothecary in this neighborhood,--the only inconvenience of
the situation, perhaps,--but so it is; we have not a medical man within
reach. He is a Haden, nothing but a Haden, a sort of wonderful
nondescript creature on two legs, something between a man and an angel,
but without the least spice of an apothecary. He is, perhaps, the only
person not an apothecary hereabouts. He has never sung to us. He will
not sing without a pianoforte accompaniment.

Mr. Meyers gives his three lessons a week, altering his days and his
hours, however, just as he chooses, never very punctual, and never
giving good measure. I have not Fanny's fondness for masters, and Mr.
Meyers does not give me any longing after them. The truth is, I think,
that they are all, at least music-masters, made of too much consequence,
and allowed to take too many liberties with their scholars' time.

We shall be delighted to see Edward on Monday, only sorry that you must
be losing him. A turkey will be equally welcome with himself. He must
prepare for his own proper bedchamber here, as Henry moved down to the
one below last week; he found the other cold.

I am sorry my mother has been suffering, and am afraid this exquisite
weather is too good to agree with her. I enjoy it all over me, from top
to toe, from right to left, longitudinally, perpendicularly, diagonally;
and I cannot but selfishly hope we are to have it last till
Christmas,--nice, unwholesome, unseasonable, relaxing, close, muggy
weather.

Oh, thank you very much for your long letter; it did me a great deal of
good. Henry accepts your offer of making his nine gallon of mead
thankfully. The mistake of the dogs rather vexed him for a moment, but
he has not thought of it since. To-day he makes a third attempt at his
strengthening plaister, and as I am sure he will now be getting out a
great deal, it is to be wished that he may be able to keep it on. He
sets off this morning by the Chelsea coach to sign bonds and visit
Henrietta St., and I have no doubt will be going every day to Henrietta
St.

Fanny and I were very snug by ourselves as soon as we were satisfied
about our invalid's being safe at Hanwell. By manoeuvring and good luck
we foiled all the Malings' attempts upon us. Happily I caught a little
cold on Wednesday, the morning we were in town, which we made very
useful, and we saw nobody but our precious[38] and Mr. Tilson.

This evening the Malings are allowed to drink tea with us. We are in
hopes--that is, we wish--Miss Palmer and the little girls may come this
morning. You know, of course, that she could not come on Thursday, and
she will not attempt to name any other day.

God bless you. Excuse the shortness of this, but I must finish it now,
that I may save you 2_d._ Best love.

                                  Yours affectionately,     J. A.

It strikes me that I have no business to give the P. R. a binding, but
we will take counsel upon the question.

I am glad you have put the flounce on your chintz; I am sure it must
look particularly well, and it is what I had thought of.

  Miss AUSTEN,
    Chawton, Alton, Hants.