HENRIETTA ST., Wednesday (Sept. 15, ½ past 8).

HERE I am, my dearest Cassandra, seated in the breakfast, dining,
sitting room, beginning with all my might. Fanny will join me as soon as
she is dressed, and begin her letter.

We had a very good journey, weather and roads excellent; the three first
stages for 1_s._ 6_d._, and our only misadventure the being delayed
about a quarter of an hour at Kingston for horses, and being obliged to
put up with a pair belonging to a hackney coach and their coachman,
which left no room on the barouche box for Lizzy, who was to have gone
her last stage there as she did the first; consequently we were all
four within, which was a little crowded.

We arrived at a quarter-past four, and were kindly welcomed by the
coachman, and then by his master, and then by William, and then by Mrs.
Pengird, who all met us before we reached the foot of the stairs. Mde.
Bigion was below dressing us a most comfortable dinner of soup, fish,
bouillée, partridges, and an apple tart, which we sat down to soon after
five, after cleaning and dressing ourselves, and feeling that we were
most commodiously disposed of. The little adjoining dressing-room to our
apartment makes Fanny and myself very well off indeed, and as we have
poor Eliza's[20] bed our space is ample every way.

Sace arrived safely about half-past six. At seven we set off in a coach
for the Lyceum; were at home again in about four hours and a half; had
soup and wine and water, and then went to our holes.

Edward finds his quarters very snug and quiet. I must get a softer pen.
This is harder. I am in agonies. I have not yet seen Mr. Crabbe.
Martha's letter is gone to the post.

I am going to write nothing but short sentences. There shall be two full
stops in every line. Layton and Shear's is Bedford House. We mean to
get there before breakfast if it's possible; for we feel more and more
how much we have to do and how little time. This house looks very nice.
It seems like Sloane Street moved here. I believe Henry is just rid of
Sloane Street. Fanny does not come, but I have Edward seated by me
beginning a letter, which looks natural.

Henry has been suffering from the pain in the face which he has been
subject to before. He caught cold at Matlock, and since his return has
been paying a little for past pleasure. It is nearly removed now, but he
looks thin in the face, either from the pain or the fatigues of his
tour, which must have been great.

Lady Robert is delighted with P. and P.,[21] and really was so, as I
understand, before she knew who wrote it, for of course she knows now.
He told her with as much satisfaction as if it were my wish. He did not
tell me this, but he told Fanny. And Mr. Hastings! I am quite delighted
with what such a man writes about it. Henry sent him the books after his
return from Daylesford, but you will hear the letter too.

Let me be rational, and return to my two full stops.

I talked to Henry at the play last night. We were in a private box,--Mr.
Spencer's,--which made it much more pleasant. The box is directly on
the stage. One is infinitely less fatigued than in the common way. But
Henry's plans are not what one could wish. He does not mean to be at
Chawton till the 29th. He must be in town again by Oct. 5. His plan is
to get a couple of days of pheasant shooting and then return directly.
His wish was to bring you back with him. I have told him your scruples.
He wishes you to suit yourself as to time, and if you cannot come till
later, will send for you at any time as far as Bagshot. He presumed you
would not find difficulty in getting so far. I could not say you would.
He proposed your going with him into Oxfordshire. It was his own thought
at first. I could not but catch at it for you.

We have talked of it again this morning (for now we have breakfasted),
and I am convinced that if you can make it suit in other respects you
need not scruple on his account. If you cannot come back with him on the
3rd or 4th, therefore, I do hope you will contrive to go to Adlestrop.
By not beginning your absence till about the middle of this month I
think you may manage it very well. But you will think all this over. One
could wish he had intended to come to you earlier, but it cannot be
helped.

I said nothing to him of Mrs. H. and Miss B., that he might not suppose
difficulties. Shall not you put them into our own room? This seems to
me the best plan, and the maid will be most conveniently near.

Oh, dear me! when I shall ever have done. We did go to Layton and
Shear's before breakfast. Very pretty English poplins at 4_s._ 3_d._;
Irish, ditto at 6_s._; more pretty, certainly,--beautiful.

Fanny and the two little girls are gone to take places for to-night at
Covent Garden; "Clandestine Marriage" and "Midas." The latter will be a
fine show for L. and M.[22] They revelled last night in "Don Juan," whom
we left in hell at half-past eleven. We had scaramouch and a ghost, and
were delighted. I speak of them; my delight was very tranquil, and the
rest of us were sober-minded. "Don Juan" was the last of three musical
things. "Five Hours at Brighton," in three acts,--of which one was over
before we arrived, none the worse,--and the "Beehive," rather less flat
and trumpery.

I have this moment received 5_l._ from kind, beautiful Edward. Fanny has
a similar gift. I shall save what I can of it for your better leisure in
this place. My letter was from Miss Sharpe,--nothing particular. A
letter from Fanny Cage this morning.

_Four o'clock._--We are just come back from doing Mrs. Tickars, Miss
Hare, and Mr. Spence. Mr. Hall is here, and while Fanny is under his
hands, I will try to write a little more.

Miss Hare had some pretty caps, and is to make me one like one of them,
only white satin instead of blue. It will be white satin and lace, and a
little white flower perking out of the left ear, like Harriot Byron's
feather. I have allowed her to go as far as 1_l._ 16_s._ My gown is to
be trimmed everywhere with white ribbon plaited on somehow or other. She
says it will look well. I am not sanguine. They trim with white very
much.

I learnt from Mrs. Tickars's young lady, to my high amusement, that the
stays now are not made to force the bosom up at all; that was a very
unbecoming, unnatural fashion. I was really glad to hear that they are
not to be so much off the shoulders as they were.

Going to Mr. Spence's was a sad business, and cost us many tears;
unluckily we were obliged to go a second time before he could do more
than just look. We went first at half-past twelve and afterwards at
three; papa with us each time; and, alas! we are to go again to-morrow.
Lizzy is not finished yet. There have been no teeth taken out, however,
nor will be, I believe; but he finds hers in a very bad state, and seems
to think particularly ill of their durableness. They have been all
cleaned, hers filed, and are to be filed again. There is a very sad hole
between two of her front teeth.

_Thursday Morning, half-past Seven._--Up and dressed and downstairs in
order to finish my letter in time for the parcel. At eight I have an
appointment with Madame B., who wants to show me something downstairs.
At nine we are to set off for Grafton House, and get that over before
breakfast. Edward is so kind as to walk there with us. We are to be at
Mr. Spence's again at 11.5: from that time shall be driving about I
suppose till four o'clock at least. We are, if possible, to call on Mrs.
Tilson.

Mr. Hall was very punctual yesterday, and curled me out at a great rate.
I thought it looked hideous, and longed for a snug cap instead, but my
companions silenced me by their admiration. I had only a bit of velvet
round my head. I did not catch cold, however. The weather is all in my
favor. I have had no pain in my face since I left you.

We had very good places in the box next the stage-box, front and second
row; the three old ones behind, of course. I was particularly
disappointed at seeing nothing of Mr. Crabbe. I felt sure of him when I
saw that the boxes were fitted up with crimson velvet. The new Mr. Terry
was Lord Ogleby, and Henry thinks he may do; but there was no acting
more than moderate, and I was as much amused by the remembrances
connected with "Midas" as with any part of it. The girls were very much
delighted, but still prefer "Don Juan;" and I must say that I have seen
nobody on the stage who has been a more interesting character than that
compound of cruelty and lust.

It was not possible for me to get the worsteds yesterday. I heard Edward
last night pressing Henry to come to you, and I think Henry engaged to
go there after his November collection. Nothing has been done as to S.
and S.[23] The books came to hand too late for him to have time for it
before he went. Mr. Hastings never hinted at Eliza in the smallest
degree. Henry knew nothing of Mr. Trimmer's death. I tell you these
things that you may not have to ask them over again.

There is a new clerk sent down to Alton, a Mr. Edmund Williams, a young
man whom Henry thinks most highly of, and he turns out to be a son of
the luckless Williamses of Grosvenor Place.

I long to have you hear Mr. H.'s opinion of P. and P. His admiring my
Elizabeth so much is particularly welcome to me.

Instead of saving my superfluous wealth for you to spend, I am going to
treat myself with spending it myself. I hope, at least, that I shall
find some poplin at Layton and Shear's that will tempt me to buy it. If
I do, it shall be sent to Chawton, as half will be for you; for I depend
upon your being so kind as to accept it, being the main point. It will
be a great pleasure to me. Don't say a word. I only wish you could
choose too. I shall send twenty yards.

Now for Bath. Poor F. Cage has suffered a good deal from her accident.
The noise of the White Hart was terrible to her. They will keep her
quiet, I dare say. She is not so much delighted with the place as the
rest of the party; probably, as she says herself, from having been less
well, but she thinks she should like it better in the season. The
streets are very empty now, and the shops not so gay as she expected.
They are at No. 1 Henrietta Street, the corner of Laura Place, and have
no acquaintance at present but the Bramstons.

Lady Bridges drinks at the Cross Bath, her son at the Hot, and Louisa is
going to bathe. Dr. Parry seems to be half starving Mr. Bridges, for he
is restricted to much such a diet as James's, bread, water and meat, and
is never to eat so much of that as he wishes, and he is to walk a great
deal,--walk till he drops, I believe,--gout or no gout. It really is to
that purpose. I have not exaggerated.

Charming weather for you and us, and the travellers, and everybody. You
will take your walk this afternoon, and . . .

  Henrietta Street, the autumn of 1813.
    Miss AUSTEN, Chawton.
      By favor of Mr. Gray.

FOOTNOTES:

[20] Eliza, Henry Austen's first wife, who had died in the earlier part
of this year.

[21] "Pride and Prejudice."

[22] Lizzy and Marianne.

[23] "Sense and Sensibility."