HANS PLACE, Wednesday.

MY DEAR ANNA,--I have been very far from finding your book an evil, I
assure you. I read it immediately and with great pleasure. I think you
are going on very well. The description of Dr. Griffin and Lady Helena's
unhappiness is very good, and just what was likely to be. I am curious
to know what the end of them will be. The name of Newton Priors is
really invaluable; I never met with anything superior to it. It is
delightful, and one could live on the name of Newton Priors for a
twelvemonth. Indeed, I think you get on very fast. I only wish other
people of my acquaintance could compose as rapidly. I am pleased with
the dog scene and with the whole of George and Susan's love, but am more
particularly struck with your serious conversations. They are very good
throughout. St. Julian's history was quite a surprise to me. You had not
very long known it yourself, I suspect; but I have no objection to make
to the circumstance, and it is very well told. His having been in love
with the aunt gives Cecilia an additional interest with him. I like the
idea,--a very proper compliment to an aunt! I rather imagine indeed that
nieces are seldom chosen but out of compliment to some aunt or another.
I dare say Ben was in love with me once, and would never have thought of
you if he had not supposed me dead of scarlet fever. Yes, I was in a
mistake as to the number of books. I thought I had read three before the
three at Chawton, but fewer than six will not do. I want to see dear
Bell Griffin again; and had you not better give some hint of St.
Julian's early history in the beginning of the story?

We shall see nothing of Streatham while we are in town, as Mrs. Hill is
to lie in of a daughter. Mrs. Blackstone is to be with her. Mrs.
Heathcote and Miss Bigg[35] are just leaving. The latter writes me word
that Miss Blackford is married, but I have never seen it in the papers,
and one may as well be single if the wedding is not to be in print.

                                  Your affectionate aunt,      J. A.