CHAWTON (Feb. 20, 1816).

MY DEAREST FANNY,--You are inimitable, irresistible. You are the delight
of my life. Such letters, such entertaining letters, as you have lately
sent! such a description of your queer little heart! such a lovely
display of what imagination does! You are worth your weight in gold, or
even in the new silver coinage. I cannot express to you what I have felt
in reading your history of yourself,--how full of pity and concern, and
admiration and amusement I have been! You are the paragon of all that is
silly and sensible, commonplace and eccentric, sad and lively, provoking
and interesting. Who can keep pace with the fluctuations of your fancy,
the capprizios of your taste, the contradictions of your feelings? You
are so odd, and all the time so perfectly natural!--so peculiar in
yourself, and yet so like everybody else!

It is very, very gratifying to me to know you so intimately. You can
hardly think what a pleasure it is to me to have such thorough pictures
of your heart. Oh, what a loss it will be when you are married! You are
too agreeable in your single state,--too agreeable as a niece. I shall
hate you when your delicious play of mind is all settled down into
conjugal and maternal affections.

Mr. B---- frightens me. He will have you. I see you at the altar. I have
some faith in Mrs. C. Cage's observation, and still more in Lizzy's; and
besides, I know it must be so. He must be wishing to attach you. It
would be too stupid and too shameful in him to be otherwise; and all the
family are seeking your acquaintance.

Do not imagine that I have any real objection; I have rather taken a
fancy to him than not, and I like the house for you. I only do not like
you should marry anybody. And yet I do wish you to marry very much,
because I know you will never be happy till you are; but the loss of a
Fanny Knight will be never made up to me. My "affec. niece F. C. B----"
will be but a poor substitute. I do not like your being nervous, and so
apt to cry,--it is a sign you are not quite well; but I hope Mr.
Scud--as you always write his name (your Mr. Scuds amuse me very
much)--will do you good.

What a comfort that Cassandra should be so recovered! It was more than
we had expected. I can easily believe she was very patient and very
good. I always loved Cassandra for her fine dark eyes and sweet temper.
I am almost entirely cured of my rheumatism,--just a little pain in my
knee now and then, to make me remember what it was, and keep on flannel.
Aunt Cassandra nursed me so beautifully.

I enjoy your visit to Goodnestone, it must be a great pleasure to you;
you have not seen Fanny Cage in comfort so long. I hope she represents
and remonstrates and reasons with you properly. Why should you be living
in dread of his marrying somebody else? (Yet how natural!) You did not
choose to have him yourself, why not allow him to take comfort where he
can? In your conscience you know that he could not bear a companion with
a more animated character. You cannot forget how you felt under the idea
of its having been possible that he might have dined in Hans Place.

My dearest Fanny, I cannot bear you should be unhappy about him. Think
of his principles; think of his father's objection, of want of money,
etc., etc. But I am doing no good; no, all that I urge against him will
rather make you take his part more,--sweet, perverse Fanny.

And now I will tell you that we like your Henry to the utmost, to the
very top of the glass, quite brimful. He is a very pleasing young man. I
do not see how he could be mended. He does really bid fair to be
everything his father and sister could wish; and William I love very
much indeed, and so we do all; he is quite our own William. In short, we
are very comfortable together; that is, we can answer for ourselves.

Mrs. Deedes is as welcome as May to all our benevolence to her son; we
only lamented that we could not do more, and that the 50_l._ note we
slipped into his hand at parting was necessarily the limit of our
offering. Good Mrs. Deedes! Scandal and gossip; yes, I dare say you are
well stocked, but I am very fond of Mrs. ---- for reasons good. Thank
you for mentioning her praise of "Emma," etc.

I have contributed the marking to Uncle H.'s shirts, and now they are a
complete memorial of the tender regard of many.

_Friday._--I had no idea when I began this yesterday of sending it
before your brother went back, but I have written away my foolish
thoughts at such a rate that I will not keep them many hours longer to
stare me in the face.

Much obliged for the quadrilles, which I am grown to think pretty
enough, though of course they are very inferior to the cotillons of my
own day.

Ben and Anna walked here last Sunday to hear Uncle Henry, and she looked
so pretty, it was quite a pleasure to see her, so young and so blooming
and so innocent, as if she had never had a wicked thought in her life,
which yet one has some reason to suppose she must have had, if we
believe the doctrine of original sin. I hope Lizzy will have her play
very kindly arranged for her. Henry is generally thought very
good-looking, but not so handsome as Edward. I think I prefer his face.
Wm. is in excellent looks, has a fine appetite, and seems perfectly
well. You will have a great break up at Godmersham in the spring. You
must feel their all going. It is very right, however! Poor Miss C.! I
shall pity her when she begins to understand herself.

Your objection to the quadrilles delighted me exceedingly. Pretty well,
for a lady irrecoverably attached to one person! Sweet Fanny, believe no
such thing of yourself, spread no such malicious slander upon your
understanding within the precincts of your imagination. Do not speak ill
of your sense merely for the gratification of your fancy; yours is sense
which deserves more honorable treatment. You are not in love with him;
you never have been really in love with him.

                                  Yours very affectionately,
                                                       J. AUSTEN.

  Miss KNIGHT,
    Godmersham Park, Faversham, Kent.