"BULL AND GEORGE," DARTFORD,
                                        Wednesday (October 24, 1798).

MY DEAR CASSANDRA,--You have already heard from Daniel, I conclude, in
what excellent time we reached and quitted Sittingbourne, and how very
well my mother bore her journey thither. I am now able to send you a
continuation of the same good account of her. She was very little
fatigued on her arrival at this place, has been refreshed by a
comfortable dinner, and now seems quite stout. It wanted five minutes of
twelve when we left Sittingbourne, from whence we had a famous pair of
horses, which took us to Rochester in an hour and a quarter; the postboy
seemed determined to show my mother that Kentish drivers were not always
tedious, and really drove as fast as Cax.

Our next stage was not quite so expeditiously performed; the road was
heavy, and our horses very indifferent. However, we were in such good
time and my mother bore her journey so well, that expedition was of
little importance to us; and as it was, we were very little more than
two hours and a half coming hither, and it was scarcely past four when
we stopped at the inn. My mother took some of her bitters at Ospringe,
and some more at Rochester, and she ate some bread several times.

We have got apartments up two pair of stairs, as we could not be
otherwise accommodated with a sitting-room and bed-chambers on the same
floor which we wished to be. We have one double-bedded and one
single-bedded room; in the former my mother and I are to sleep. I shall
leave you to guess who is to occupy the other. We sate down to dinner a
little after five, and had some beef-steaks and a boiled fowl, but no
oyster sauce.

I should have begun my letter soon after our arrival, but for a little
adventure which prevented me. After we had been here a quarter of an
hour it was discovered that my writing and dressing boxes had been by
accident put into a chaise which was just packing off as we came in, and
were driven away toward Gravesend in their way to the West Indies. No
part of my property could have been such a prize before, for in my
writing-box was all my worldly wealth, 7_l._, and my dear Harry's
deputation. Mr. Nottley immediately despatched a man and horse after the
chaise, and in half an hour's time I had the pleasure of being as rich
as ever; they were got about two or three miles off.

My day's journey has been pleasanter in every respect than I expected. I
have been very little crowded and by no means unhappy. Your
watchfulness with regard to the weather on our accounts was very kind
and very effectual. We had one heavy shower on leaving Sittingbourne,
but afterwards the clouds cleared away, and we had a very bright
_chrystal_ afternoon.

My father is now reading the "Midnight Bell," which he has got from the
library, and mother sitting by the fire. Our route to-morrow is not
determined. We have none of us much inclination for London, and if Mr.
Nottley will give us leave, I think we shall go to Staines through
Croydon and Kingston, which will be much pleasanter than any other way;
but he is decidedly for Clapham and Battersea. God bless you all!

                                         Yours affectionately, J. A.

I flatter myself that _itty Dordy_ will not forget me at least under a
week. Kiss him for me.

  Miss AUSTEN,
    Godmersham Park, Faversham.