SOUTHAMPTON, February 8.

. . . OUR garden is putting in order by a man who bears a remarkably
good character, has a very fine complexion, and asks something less than
the first. The shrubs which border the gravel walk, he says, are only
sweetbrier and roses, and the latter of an indifferent sort; we mean to
get a few of a better kind, therefore, and at my own particular desire
he procures us some syringas. I could not do without a syringa, for the
sake of Cowper's line. We talk also of a laburnum. The border under the
terrace wall is clearing away to receive currants and gooseberry bushes,
and a spot is found very proper for raspberries.

The alterations and improvements within doors, too, advance very
properly, and the offices will be made very convenient indeed. Our
dressing-table is constructing on the spot, out of a large kitchen table
belonging to the house, for doing which we have the permission of Mr.
Husket, Lord Lansdown's painter,--domestic painter, I should call him,
for he lives in the castle. Domestic chaplains have given way to this
more necessary office, and I suppose whenever the walls want no touching
up he is employed about my lady's face.

The morning was so wet that I was afraid we should not be able to see
our little visitor; but Frank, who alone could go to church, called for
her after service, and she is now talking away at my side and examining
the treasures of my writing-desk drawers,--very happy, I believe. Not at
all shy, of course. Her name is Catherine, and her sister's Caroline.
She is something like her brother, and as short for her age, but not so
well-looking.

What is become of all the shyness in the world? Moral as well as natural
diseases disappear in the progress of time, and new ones take their
place. Shyness and the sweating sickness have given way to confidence
and paralytic complaints. . . .

_Evening._--Our little visitor has just left us, and left us highly
pleased with her; she is a nice, natural, open-hearted, affectionate
girl, with all the ready civility which one sees in the best children in
the present day; so unlike anything that I was myself at her age, that I
am often all astonishment and shame. Half her time was spent at
spillikins, which I consider as a very valuable part of our household
furniture, and as not the least important benefaction from the family of
Knight to that of Austen.

But I must tell you a story. Mary has for some time had notice from Mrs.
Dickson of the intended arrival of a certain Miss Fowler in this place.
Miss F. is an intimate friend of Mrs. D., and a good deal known as such
to Mary. On Thursday last she called here while we were out. Mary
found, on our return, her card with only her name on it, and she had
left word that she would call again. The particularity of this made us
talk, and, among other conjectures, Frank said in joke, "I dare say she
is staying with the Pearsons." The connection of the names struck Mary,
and she immediately recollected Miss Fowler's having been very intimate
with persons so called, and, upon putting everything together, we have
scarcely a doubt of her being actually staying with the only family in
the place whom we cannot visit.

What a _contretemps_! in the language of France. What an unluckiness! in
that of Madame Duval. The black gentleman has certainly employed one of
his menial imps to bring about this complete, though trifling mischief.
Miss F. has never called again, but we are in daily expectation of it.
Miss P. has, of course, given her a proper understanding of the
business. It is evident that Miss F. did not expect or wish to have the
visit returned, and Frank is quite as much on his guard for his wife as
we could desire for her sake or our own.

We shall rejoice in being so near Winchester when Edward belongs to it,
and can never have our spare bed filled more to our satisfaction than by
him. Does he leave Eltham at Easter?

We are reading "Clarentine," and are surprised to find how foolish it
is. I remember liking it much less on a second reading than at the
first, and it does not bear a third at all. It is full of unnatural
conduct and forced difficulties, without striking merit of any kind.

Miss Harrison is going into Devonshire, to attend Mrs. Dusantoy, as
usual. Miss J. is married to young Mr. G., and is to be very unhappy. He
swears, drinks, is cross, jealous, selfish, and brutal. The match makes
her family miserable, and has occasioned his being disinherited.

The Browns are added to our list of acquaintance. He commands the Sea
Fencibles here, under Sir Thomas, and was introduced at his own desire
by the latter when we saw him last week. As yet the gentlemen only have
visited, as Mrs. B. is ill; but she is a nice-looking woman, and wears
one of the prettiest straw bonnets in the place.

_Monday._--The garret beds are made, and ours will be finished to-day. I
had hoped it would be finished on Saturday, but neither Mrs. Hall nor
Jenny was able to give help enough for that, and I have as yet done very
little, and Mary nothing at all. This week we shall do more, and I
should like to have all the five beds completed by the end of it. There
will then be the window-curtains, sofa-cover, and a carpet to be
altered.

I should not be surprised if we were to be visited by James again this
week; he gave us reason to expect him soon, and if they go to Eversley
he cannot come next week.

There, I flatter myself I have constructed you a smartish letter,
considering my want of materials; but, like my dear Dr. Johnson, I
believe I have dealt more in notions than facts.

I hope your cough is gone, and that you are otherwise well, and remain,
with love,

                                    Yours affectionately,      J. A.

  Miss AUSTEN,
    Godmersham Park, Faversham, Kent.