HENRIETTA ST., Wednesday (March 9).

WELL, we went to the play again last night, and as we were out a great
part of the morning too, shopping, and seeing the Indian jugglers, I am
very glad to be quiet now till dressing-time. We are to dine at the
Tilsons', and to-morrow at Mr. Spencer's.

We had not done breakfast yesterday when Mr. J. Plumptre appeared to say
that he had secured a box. Henry asked him to dine here, which I fancy
he was very happy to do, and so at five o'clock we four sat down to
table together, while the master of the house was preparing for going
out himself. The "Farmer's Wife" is a musical thing in three acts, and
as Edward was steady in not staying for anything more, we were at home
before ten.

Fanny and Mr. J. P. are delighted with Miss S., and her merit in singing
is, I dare say, very great; that she gave me no pleasure is no
reflection upon her, nor, I hope, upon myself, being what Nature made me
on that article. All that I am sensible of in Miss S. is a pleasing
person and no skill in acting. We had Mathews, Liston, and Emery; of
course, some amusement.

Our friends were off before half-past eight this morning, and had the
prospect of a heavy cold journey before them. I think they both liked
their visit very much. I am sure Fanny did. Henry sees decided
attachment between her and his new acquaintance.

I have a cold, too, as well as my mother and Martha. Let it be a
generous emulation between us which can get rid of it first.

I wear my gauze gown to-day, long sleeves and all. I shall see how they
succeed, but as yet I have no reason to suppose long sleeves are
allowable. I have lowered the bosom, especially at the corners, and
plaited black satin ribbon round the top. Such will be my costume of
vine-leaves and paste.

Prepare for a play the very first evening, I rather think Covent Garden,
to see Young in "Richard." I have answered for your little companion's
being conveyed to Keppel St. immediately. I have never yet been able to
get there myself, but hope I shall soon.

What cruel weather this is! and here is Lord Portsmouth married, too, to
Miss Hanson.[30]

Henry has finished "Mansfield Park," and his approbation has not
lessened. He found the last half of the last volume extremely
interesting.

I suppose my mother recollects that she gave me no money for paying
Brecknell and Twining, and my funds will not supply enough.

We are home in such good time that I can finish my letter to-night,
which will be better than getting up to do it to-morrow, especially as,
on account of my cold, which has been very heavy in my head this
evening, I rather think of lying in bed later than usual. I would not
but be well enough to go to Hertford St. on any account.

We met only Genl. Chowne to-day, who has not much to say for himself. I
was ready to laugh at the remembrance of Frederick, and such a different
Frederick as we chose to fancy him to the real Christopher!

Mrs. Tilson had long sleeves, too, and she assured me that they are worn
in the evening by many. I was glad to hear this. She dines here, I
believe, next Tuesday.

On Friday we are to be snug with only Mr. Barlowe and an evening of
business. I am so pleased that the mead is brewed. Love to all. I have
written to Mrs. Hill, and care for nobody.

                            Yours affectionately,       J. AUSTEN.

  Miss AUSTEN, Chawton.
    By favor of Mr. GRAY.

the father of the present earl.