CHAWTON, Tuesday (June 13).

MY DEAREST CASSANDRA,--Fanny takes my mother to Alton this morning,
which gives me an opportunity of sending you a few lines without any
other trouble than that of writing them.

This is a delightful day in the country, and I hope not much too hot for
town. Well, you had a good journey, I trust, and all that, and not rain
enough to spoil your bonnet. It appeared so likely to be a wet evening
that I went up to the Gt. House between three and four, and dawdled away
an hour very comfortably, though Edwd. was not very brisk. The air was
clearer in the evening, and he was better. We all five walked together
into the kitchen garden and along the Gosport road, and they drank tea
with us.

You will be glad to hear that G. Turner has another situation, something
in the cow line, near Rumsey, and he wishes to move immediately, which
is not likely to be inconvenient to anybody.

The new nurseryman at Alton comes this morning to value the crops in the
garden.

The only letter to-day is from Mrs. Cooke to me. They do not leave home
till July, and want me to come to them, according to my promise. And,
after considering everything, I have resolved on going. My companions
promote it. I will not go, however, till after Edward is gone, that he
may feel he has a somebody to give memorandums to, to the last. I must
give up all help from his carriage, of course. And, at any rate, it must
be such an excess of expense that I have quite made up my mind to it,
and do not mean to care.

I have been thinking of Triggs and the chair, you may be sure, but I
know it will end in posting. They will meet me at Guildford.

In addition to their standing claims on me they admire "Mansfield Park"
exceedingly. Mr. Cooke says "it is the most sensible novel he ever
read," and the manner in which I treat the clergy delights them very
much. Altogether, I must go, and I want you to join me there when your
visit in Henrietta St. is over. Put this into your capacious head.

Take care of yourself, and do not be trampled to death in running after
the Emperor. The report in Alton yesterday was that they would certainly
travel this road either to or from Portsmouth. I long to know what this
bow of the Prince's will produce.

I saw Mrs. Andrews yesterday. Mrs. Browning had seen her before. She is
very glad to send an Elizabeth.

Miss Benn continues the same. Mr. Curtis, however, saw her yesterday,
and said her hand was going on as well as possible. Accept our best
love.

                                  Yours very affectionately,
                                                          J. AUSTEN.

  Miss AUSTEN, 10 Henrietta Street,
    By favor of Mr. GRAY.