GODMERSHAM PARK, Saturday (Nov. 6).

MY DEAREST CASSANDRA,--Having half an hour before breakfast (very snug,
in my own room, lovely morning, excellent fire--fancy me!) I will give
you some account of the last two days. And yet, what is there to be
told? I shall get foolishly minute unless I cut the matter short.

We met only the Bretons at Chilham Castle, besides a Mr. and Mrs.
Osborne and a Miss Lee staying in the house, and were only fourteen
altogether. My brother and Fanny thought it the pleasantest party they
had ever known there, and I was very well entertained by bits and
scraps. I had long wanted to see Dr. Breton, and his wife amuses me very
much with her affected refinement and elegance. Miss Lee I found very
conversable; she admires Crabbe as she ought. She is at an age of
reason, ten years older than myself at least. She was at the famous ball
at Chilham Castle, so of course you remember her.

By the by, as I must leave off being young, I find many _douceurs_ in
being a sort of _chaperon_, for I am put on the sofa near the fire, and
can drink as much wine as I like. We had music in the evening: Fanny and
Miss Wildman played, and Mr. James Wildman sat close by and listened, or
pretended to listen.

Yesterday was a day of dissipation all through: first came Sir Brook to
dissipate us before breakfast; then there was a call from Mr. Sherer,
then a regular morning visit from Lady Honeywood in her way home from
Eastwell; then Sir Brook and Edward set off; then we dined (five in
number) at half-past four; then we had coffee; and at six Miss Clewes,
Fanny, and I drove away. We had a beautiful night for our frisks. We
were earlier than we need have been, but after a time Lady B. and her
two companions appeared,--we had kept places for them; and there we sat,
all six in a row, under a side wall, I between Lucy Foote and Miss
Clewes.

Lady B. was much what I expected; I could not determine whether she was
rather handsome or very plain. I liked her for being in a hurry to have
the concert over and get away, and for getting away at last with a great
deal of decision and promptness, not waiting to compliment and dawdle
and fuss about seeing dear Fanny, who was half the evening in another
part of the room with her friends the Plumptres. I am growing too
minute, so I will go to breakfast.

When the concert was over, Mrs. Harrison and I found each other out, and
had a very comfortable little complimentary friendly chat. She is a
sweet woman,--still quite a sweet woman in herself, and so like her
sister! I could almost have thought I was speaking to Mrs. Lefroy. She
introduced me to her daughter, whom I think pretty, but most dutifully
inferior to _la Mère Beauté_. The Faggs and the Hammonds were
there,--Wm. Hammond the only young man of renown. Miss looked very
handsome, but I prefer her little smiling flirting sister Julia.

I was just introduced at last to Mary Plumptre, but I should hardly know
her again. She was delighted with me, however, good enthusiastic soul!
And Lady B. found me handsomer than she expected, so you see I am not so
very bad as you might think for.

It was twelve before we reached home. We were all dog-tired, but pretty
well to-day: Miss Clewes says she has not caught cold, and Fanny's does
not seem worse. I was so tired that I began to wonder how I should get
through the ball next Thursday; but there will be so much more variety
then in walking about, and probably so much less heat, that perhaps I
may not feel it more. My china crape is still kept for the ball. Enough
of the concert.

I had a letter from Mary yesterday. They travelled down to Cheltenham
last Monday very safely, and are certainly to be there a month. Bath is
still Bath. The H. Bridges must quit them early next week, and Louisa
seems not quite to despair of their all moving together, but to those
who see at a distance there appears no chance of it. Dr. Parry does not
want to keep Lady B. at Bath when she can once move. That is lucky. You
will see poor Mr. Evelyn's death.

Since I wrote last, my 2nd edit. has stared me in the face. Mary tells
me that Eliza means to buy it. I wish she may. It can hardly depend upon
any more Fyfield Estates. I cannot help hoping that many will feel
themselves obliged to buy it. I shall not mind imagining it a
disagreeable duty to them, so as they do it. Mary heard before she left
home that it was very much admired at Cheltenham, and that it was given
to Miss Hamilton. It is pleasant to have such a respectable writer
named. I cannot tire you, I am sure, on this subject, or I would
apologize.

What weather, and what news! We have enough to do to admire them both. I
hope you derive your full share of enjoyment from each.

I have extended my lights and increased my acquaintance a good deal
within these two days. Lady Honeywood you know; I did not sit near
enough to be a perfect judge, but I thought her extremely pretty, and
her manners have all the recommendations of ease and good-humor and
unaffectedness; and going about with four horses and nicely dressed
herself, she is altogether a perfect sort of woman.

Oh, and I saw Mr. Gipps last night,--the useful Mr. Gipps, whose
attentions came in as acceptably to us in handing us to the carriage,
for want of a better man, as they did to Emma Plumptre. I thought him
rather a good-looking little man.

I long for your letter to-morrow, particularly that I may know my fate
as to London. My first wish is that Henry should really choose what he
likes best; I shall certainly not be sorry if he does not want me.
Morning church to-morrow; I shall come back with impatient feelings.

The Sherers are gone, but the Pagets are not come: we shall therefore
have Mr. S. again. Mr. Paget acts like an unsteady man. Dr. Hant,
however, gives him a very good character; what is wrong is to be imputed
to the lady. I dare say the house likes female government.

I have a nice long black and red letter from Charles, but not
communicating much that I did not know.

There is some chance of a good ball next week, as far as females go.
Lady Bridges may perhaps be there with some Knatchbulls. Mrs. Harrison
perhaps, with Miss Oxenden and the Miss Papillons; and if Mrs. Harrison,
then Lady Fagg will come.

The shades of evening are descending, and I resume my interesting
narrative. Sir Brook and my brother came back about four, and Sir Brook
almost immediately set forward again to Goodnestone. We are to have
Edwd. B. to-morrow, to pay us another Sunday's visit,--the last, for
more reasons than one; they all come home on the same day that we go.
The Deedes do not come till Tuesday; Sophia is to be the comer. She is a
disputable beauty that I want much to see. Lady Eliz. Hatton and
Annamaria called here this morning. Yes, they called; but I do not think
I can say anything more about them. They came, and they sat, and they
went.

_Sunday._--Dearest Henry! What a turn he has for being ill, and what a
thing bile is! This attack has probably been brought on in part by his
previous confinement and anxiety; but, however it came, I hope it is
going fast, and that you will be able to send a very good account of him
on Tuesday. As I hear on Wednesday, of course I shall not expect to hear
again on Friday. Perhaps a letter to Wrotham would not have an ill
effect.

We are to be off on Saturday before the post comes in, as Edward takes
his own horses all the way. He talks of nine o'clock. We shall bait at
Lenham.

Excellent sweetness of you to send me such a nice long letter; it made
its appearance, with one from my mother, soon after I and my impatient
feelings walked in. How glad I am that I did what I did! I was only
afraid that you might think the offer superfluous, but you have set my
heart at ease. Tell Henry that I will stay with him, let it be ever so
disagreeable to him.

Oh, dear me! I have not time on paper for half that I want to say. There
have been two letters from Oxford,--one from George yesterday. They got
there very safely,--Edwd. two hours behind the coach, having lost his
way in leaving London. George writes cheerfully and quietly; hopes to
have Utterson's rooms soon; went to lecture on Wednesday, states some of
his expenses, and concludes with saying, "I am afraid I shall be poor."
I am glad he thinks about it so soon. I believe there is no private
tutor yet chosen, but my brother is to hear from Edwd. on the subject
shortly.

You, and Mrs. H., and Catherine, and Alethea going about together in
Henry's carriage seeing sights--I am not used to the idea of it yet. All
that you are to see of Streatham, seen already! Your Streatham and my
Bookham may go hang. The prospect of being taken down to Chawton by
Henry perfects the plan to me. I was in hopes of your seeing some
illuminations, and you have seen them. "I thought you would come, and
you did come." I am sorry he is not to come from the Baltic sooner. Poor
Mary!

My brother has a letter from Louisa to-day of an unwelcome nature; they
are to spend the winter at Bath. It was just decided on. Dr. Parry
wished it, not from thinking the water necessary to Lady B., but that he
might be better able to judge how far his treatment of her, which is
totally different from anything she had been used to, is right; and I
suppose he will not mind having a few more of her Ladyship's guineas.
His system is a lowering one. He took twelve ounces of blood from her
when the gout appeared, and forbids wine, etc. Hitherto the plan agrees
with her. She is very well satisfied to stay, but it is a sore
disappointment to Louisa and Fanny.

The H. Bridges leave them on Tuesday, and they mean to move into a
smaller house; you may guess how Edward feels. There can be no doubt of
his going to Bath now; I should not wonder if he brought Fanny Cage back
with him.

You shall hear from me once more, some day or other.

                                  Yours very affectionately,      J. A.

We do not like Mr. Hampson's scheme.

  Miss AUSTEN,
    10 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London.