A TRIO OF NOVELS


When Jane returned home in October, after her pleasant visit to
Godmersham, she began her first real novel. She was then nearly
twenty-one, and the girlish scribblings in which she had delighted
began to be shaped into something more coherent. This very visit, with
all its bright intercourse, all its pleasant variety,—for she had been
thrown among a set of county people of better social standing than
those she usually saw,—may have quickened the germ, and been the cause
of her development. The book was at first called _First Impressions_,
and under this title she herself frequently refers to it; but some time
later she re-christened it by the name under which it was published.

The idea that the name _Pride and Prejudice_ was suggested by some
sentences at the end of _Cecilia_ has been mooted, and though
arguments against this supposition have been found, it appears
extremely probable. For in _Cecilia_ it is declared, “The whole of
this unfortunate affair has been the result of PRIDE AND PREJUDICE,”
which last words are repeated twice on the same page, each time in
large type so that they catch the eye. _Cecilia_ itself might well
have borne this title in reference to the pride and prejudice of the
Delvile family. The book was published in 1786, and we know that Jane
had a great admiration for Miss Burney’s work. In re-reading it some
time subsequently it may very easily have struck her that “Pride and
Prejudice” was an improvement on her own more common-place title, and
there was nothing to prevent her adopting it. The repetition of two
striking qualities and the alliteration may further have given rise
to _Sense and Sensibility_, which also replaced an earlier title of
_Elinor and Marianne_.

_Pride and Prejudice_ was apparently written solely to gratify the
instincts of the writer, without any thought of publication. But after
it was completed, a year later, November 1797, Jane’s father wrote for
her to the well-known publisher Cadell as follows:—

   “SIR,—I have in my possession a manuscript novel comprising 3
   vols. about the length of Miss Burney’s _Evelina_. As I am well
   aware of what consequence it is that a work of this sort should
   make its first appearance under a respectable name, I apply
   to you. I shall be much obliged therefore if you will inform
   me whether you choose to be concerned in it, what will be the
   expense of publishing it at the author’s risk, and what you will
   venture to advance for the property of it, if on perusal it is
   approved of. Should you give any encouragement I will send you
   the work.”

This proposal, modest as it is, was rejected by return of post. One
would have thought that the success of Miss Burney’s books would have
made a leading publisher anxious to look at a work on similar lines,
but no—_Pride and Prejudice_ was destined not to be published until
1813, sixteen years later!

As we have said, it is unanimously accorded the premier place amongst
Jane Austen’s novels, partly because it is full of that brilliancy
and sparkle which are its author’s greatest characteristics, and
partly because of the inimitable character of Elizabeth Bennet, whose
combined archness and intelligence captivate everyone. Elizabeth is
the embodiment of the heroine so many authors have tried to draw.
Witty without being pert, having a reasonable conceit of herself
without vanity, and a natural gaiety of heart that makes her altogether
lovable. Whether she is repelling the patronage of Lady Catherine de
Bourgh, or chaffing the sombre Darcy, she is equally delightful. Her
first scene with Lady Catherine embodies much character—

“‘Are any of your younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?’

“‘Yes, Ma’am, all.’

“‘All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second.
The younger ones out before the elder are married! Your younger sisters
must be very young?’

“‘Yes, the youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps she is full young to be
much in company. But really, Ma’am, I think it would be very hard upon
younger sisters that they should not have their share of society and
amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination
to marry early. The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of
youth as the first. And to be kept back on such a motive! I think it
would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of
mind.’

“‘Upon my word,’ said her Ladyship, ‘you give your opinion very
decidedly for so young a person. Pray what is your age?’

“‘With three younger sisters grown up,’ replied Elizabeth, smiling,
‘your Ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.’”

And again, when Lady Catherine comes to ask if the report of her
nephew’s engagement to Elizabeth is true.

“‘If you believed it impossible to be true,’ said Elizabeth, colouring
with astonishment and disdain, ‘I wonder you took the trouble of coming
so far. What could your Ladyship propose by it?’

“‘At once to insist on having such a report universally contradicted.’

“‘Your coming to Langbourn to see me and my family,’ said Elizabeth
coolly, ‘will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report
is in existence.’

“‘If! Do you then pretend to be ignorant of it? Has it not been
industriously circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a
report is spread abroad?’

“‘I never heard that it was.’

“‘And can you likewise declare there is no foundation for it?’

“‘I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your Ladyship. You
may ask questions which I shall not choose to answer.’

“‘This is not to be borne, Miss Bennet, I insist on being satisfied.
Has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?’

“‘Your Ladyship has declared it to be impossible.’”

Her verbal encounters with Darcy are equally characteristic.

“Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.

“‘Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume?’ said Miss Bingley,
‘and pray what is the result?’

“‘I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns
it himself without disguise.’

“‘No,’ said Darcy, ‘I have made no such pretension. I have faults
enough, but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare
not vouch for. It is, I believe, too little yielding; certainly too
little for the convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies
and vices of others so soon as I ought, nor their offences against
myself. My feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move
them. My temper would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once
lost is lost for ever.’

“‘_That_ is a failing indeed,’ cried Elizabeth. ‘Implacable resentment
_is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. I
really cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me.’

“‘There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some
particular evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education
can overcome.’

“‘And _your_ defect is a propensity to hate everybody.’

“‘And yours,’ he replied with a smile, ‘is wilfully to misunderstand
them.’”

Darcy, by the way, is one of the least attractive of the principal
men characters. It is inconceivable that any man with the remotest
pretension to gentlemanly feeling should say, even to himself, much
less aloud in a ball-room, on having his attention called to a young
girl sitting out: “‘Which do you mean?’ and, turning round, he looked
for a moment at Elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his
own, and coldly said,—’She is tolerable; but not handsome enough to
tempt me; and I am in no humour at present to give consequence to young
ladies who are slighted by other men.’”

Indeed, Darcy’s whole character is so averse from anything usually
associated with the word gentleman, that one wonders where Miss Austen
found her prototype. Possibly he was one of the few characters for
which she drew entirely on her imagination. In saying this there is
no innuendo that in other cases she drew straight from the life; it
is, I believe, very few novelists who ever wish to do such a thing,
but it is certainly true, and everyone who has attempted fiction knows
it, that nearly every character in a life-like book has some prototype
in real life, some man or woman who gave the first indication of a
certain character; the personality may be altered entirely, it may be
only one small quality which is derived from the prototype, but it is
nevertheless that person who brought that particular character into
existence. So far as we know there was no haughty, self-satisfied man
of the world in Jane Austen’s list of acquaintances.

It is true that Darcy is represented as behaving much better when his
pride has been bitterly stung by Elizabeth’s rejection of him, but it
is hard to believe that a man, such as he is at first represented,
could have had sufficient good in him to change his character
completely as the effect of love.

To show how entirely opinions differ it is amusing to quote some of
the remarks of Miss Mitford, who wrote in 1814, the year after the
publication of _Pride and Prejudice_: “The want of elegance is almost
the only want in Miss Austen. I have not read her _Mansfield Park_ but
it is impossible not to feel in every line of _Pride and Prejudice_, in
every word of Elizabeth, the entire want of taste which could produce
so pert, so worldly a heroine as the beloved of such a man as Darcy.
Wickham is equally bad. Oh, they were just fit for each other, and I
cannot forgive that delightful Darcy for parting them. Darcy should
have married Jane. He is of all the admirable characters the best
designed and the best sustained. I quite agree with you in preferring
Miss Austen to Miss Edgeworth. If the former had a little more taste, a
little more perception of the graceful, as well as of the humorous, I
know not indeed anyone to whom I should not prefer her. There is none
of the hardness, the cold selfishness, of Miss Edgeworth about her
writings; she is in a much better humour with the world; she preaches
no sermons; she wants nothing but the _beau ideal_ of the female
character to be a perfect novel writer!”

Miss Mitford would no doubt have preferred as a heroine the elegant
languishing female, without any of the savour of originality about her,
who was the stereotyped heroine of most works of fiction at that time.

Sir Walter Scott in the _Quarterly Review_ of 1815 makes the base
insinuation that Elizabeth having refused Darcy “does not perceive
that she has done a foolish thing, until she accidentally visits a very
handsome seat and grounds belonging to her admirer.”

We are sure from what we know of Lizzie, that this is quite unfounded.
Had she been liable to any undue influence of that sort, she would
have accepted Darcy at the first, for she knew very well all about his
position and estates from the beginning. That she had the courage and
good sense to snub him speaks much more forcibly for her character than
a like action on the part of any girl similarly circumstanced would do
now. For then a position gained by marriage was the only one a woman
could hope for, and such chances were few and far between when, as we
have seen, men were desperately prudent in their matrimonial affairs,
and looked on marriage more as a well considered and suitable monetary
alliance than as a love match, though perhaps the actual person of
the woman was not always such a matter of perfect indifference to them
as it seems to have been to the writer of the following contemporary
letter:—

“I thank you with ye utmost Gratitude for ye good offices you was
to have done me; and though I cannot now for Reasons above specifyd
accept of them, yet I hope they will still continue in Reversion:
not that I have any schemes for ever resuming my Designs upon Miss
A.: (on ye contrary I should be very loth she should wait so long)
but because whenever my Time is come You are ye first person I should
apply to, as having a good Number of Friends and Correspondents; and
none who are priviledged with ye Intimacy of Mrs. Jennings can fail of
Accomplishments to render them highly agreable to your most obedient
servant.” (_A Kentish Country House._)

The character of the solemn, pompous, thick-skinned Mr. Collins is
the best of the kind Jane ever drew; he is a creation whose name might
signify a quality of “collinesqueness.”

Perhaps within the limits possible for quotation there is nothing which
in so short a space sums up so well his inimitable character as the
letter of condolence he sends to Mr. Bennet on the occasion of Lydia’s
having eloped with the weak and untrustworthy Wickham.

“I feel myself called upon by our relationship and my situation in
life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now
suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from
Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself
sincerely sympathise with you, and all your respectable family, in
your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because
proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall
be wanting on my part, that can alleviate so severe a misfortune; or
that can comfort you under a circumstance that must be of all others,
most afflicting to a parent’s mind. The death of your daughter would
have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be
lamented, because there is reason to suppose, as my dear Charlotte
informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has
proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time,
for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think
that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be
guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. This false step in one
daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others; for who,
as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves
with such a family? And this consideration leads me to reflect, with
augmented satisfaction on a certain event of last November, for had
it been otherwise I must have been involved in all your sorrow and
disgrace. Let me advise you then, my dear sir, to console yourself as
much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection
for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offence.”

Jane’s own impressions of _Pride and Prejudice_ are given in a letter
to her sister, written many years later, on the publication of the
book—

“Miss B. dined with us on the very day of the book’s coming, and in the
evening we fairly set at it and read half the first vol. to her....
She was amused, poor soul! _That_ she could not help you know, with
two such people to lead the way, but she really does seem to admire
Elizabeth. I must confess that I think her as delightful a creature
as ever appeared in print, and how I shall be able to tolerate those
who do not like _her_ at least, I do not know. There are a few typical
errors; and a ‘said he’ or a ‘said she’ would sometimes make the
dialogue more immediately clear; but ‘I do not write for such dull
elves’ as have not a great deal of ingenuity themselves.... Our second
evening’s reading to Miss B. had not pleased me so well, but I believe
something must be attributed to my mother’s too rapid way of getting
on: though she perfectly understands the characters herself, she cannot
speak as they ought. Upon the whole, however, I am quite vain enough
and well satisfied enough. The work is rather too light and bright and
sparkling; it wants shade, it wants to be stretched out here and there
with a long chapter of sense if it could be had; if not, of solemn
specious nonsense, about something unconnected with the story; an essay
on writing, a critique on Walter Scott or the history of Buonaparte
or something that would form a contrast, and bring the reader with
increased delight to the playfulness and epigrammatism of the general
style.” And later, in reference to the same subject, she writes—

“I am exceedingly pleased that you can say what you do, after having
gone through the whole work, and Fanny’s praise is very gratifying. My
hopes were tolerably strong of _her_, but nothing like a certainty. Her
liking Darcy and Elizabeth is enough. She might hate all the others if
she would.” (Mr. Austen-Leigh’s _Memoir_.)

The fact that Jane felt the extreme brilliancy and lightness of her
own work shows that the critical faculty was active in her, but as
for wishing to do away with it in order to bring the book more into
conformity with the heavily padded novels of the time, that of course
is pure nonsense.

After only the lapse of a month or two from the completion of _First
Impressions_, Jane began on _Sense and Sensibility_, which she at
first called _Elinor and Marianne_, and which, in the form of letters,
had been written long before; probably, if the truth were known, this
might be called her first long story, and it was in any case the first
published. The story in letters has been wittily described as the
“most natural but the most improbable” form; and certainly, though
this style of novel had a brief renewal of popularity a year or two
ago, it is one that is aggravating to most readers, and requires many
clumsy expedients to fill in gaps in order to make the story hang
together connectedly. Miss Burney had employed it with good effect
in _Evelina_, but even here the story would have run much better told
straightforwardly. In any case Jane was well advised to abandon this
form. The novel was finished in 1798 but not published until 1811.

_Sense and Sensibility_, though it has never been placed first in
position among Jane Austen’s novels, has been accounted second by
many people. The two sisters, Elinor and Marianne, who represent Sense
and excessive Sensibility, are finely sketched. In this book the fact
that Jane Austen’s leading men are not equal to her leading women is
clearly exemplified. Mr. Austin Dobson speaks of the “colourless Edward
Ferrars and stiff-jointed Colonel Brandon,” and the epithets are well
deserved. We might add the selfish and unchivalrous Willoughby, for
here may be noted a defect not uncommon in women-writers, an inability
to grasp the code belonging to gentlemanly conduct. This is noticeable
in the behaviour ascribed to Darcy in _Pride and Prejudice_ already
mentioned, but it is worse in the case of Willoughby, who is supposed
to be brilliant, charming, and a gentleman, even though he acts badly
by Marianne. His long explanation with Elinor, when Marianne lies on a
sick-bed, and he himself is married, is supposed to atone for his bad
behaviour; at all events it is made to exonerate him in Elinor’s eyes,
whereas, far from exonerating him in the eyes of any ordinary person,
it shows him in a worse light than anything that has preceded.

It is only a scoundrel or cad of the weakest sort who speaks
slightingly of his wife, though unfortunately the code for women is
different, and many a woman “gives away” her husband on small enough
grounds. Yet in spite of one of the most stringent and least frequently
infringed rules of manly conduct, we find Willoughby saying, apparently
without any debasement in his creator’s eyes—

“‘With my hand and heart full of your sister, I was forced to play the
happy lover to another woman, ... Marianne, beautiful as an angel, on
one side ... and Sophia, jealous as the devil, on the other hand.’”
He then goes on to say that the letter sent in his name, which had
cut poor Marianne to the heart, was dictated by his wife. “‘What do
you think of my wife’s style of letter writing?—delicate—tender—truly
feminine—was it not?’” and in excuse for his marriage, “‘In honest
words her money was necessary to me.’”

After this even Elinor feels bound to rebuke him, saying: “‘You have
made your own choice. It was not forced on you. Your wife has a claim
to your politeness, to your respect, at least.’”

“‘Do not talk to me of my wife,’” he replies. “‘She does not deserve
your compassion. She knew I had no regard for her when we married.’”

In this book also there is a serious blot of another sort, a violation
of probabilities, which suffices to score a heavy mark against it. In
_Pride and Prejudice_ there is certainly improbability in the fact that
two portionless girls like Jane and Elizabeth Bennet should find such
husbands as Bingley and Darcy, but the improbability is lessened by the
fact that the pair of men were friends, and so one match contributes
to the other; but in _Sense and Sensibility_ the weak subterfuge for
getting rid of Lucy Price, to whom Edward holds himself in honour
bound, is hardly credible. There is no rational explanation of the
obliging conduct of Robert Ferrars, Edward’s brother; to make a man so
vain and selfish marry a woman who could bring him nothing, and whose
charms were not great, is a poor means of escaping from an undesirable
deadlock.

There remain a few other points for comment. We have in Mrs. Dashwood
one of the silly though fond mothers that Jane Austen delights to
describe. In Mrs. Jennings we have the comic relief, not so clever as
that supplied by Mr. Collins in _Pride and Prejudice_ or by Miss Bates
in _Emma_. A little too coarse for many people, but still true enough
to the times, when the fact of a man’s paying any attention to a girl
at all was sufficient to make the gossips discuss their marriage and
settlement in life with all openness.

The second chapter, often quoted, is one of the finest scenes in the
whole book; here John Dashwood, mindful of his promise to his dying
father, suggests giving each of his sisters a portion of one thousand
pounds out of the magnificent estate which has come to him under the
entail, but by the insidious arguments of his wife he at last settles
it with his conscience to afford them such assistance “as looking out
for a comfortable small house for them, helping them to move their
things, and sending them presents of fish and game and so forth,
whenever they are in season.”

The cottage in which the Dashwoods were installed at Barton seems
greatly to have resembled the cottage at Chawton. “As a house, Barton
Cottage, though small, was comfortable and compact; but as a cottage
it was defective, for the building was regular, the roof was tiled, the
window-shutters were not painted green, nor were the walls covered with
honeysuckles. A narrow passage led directly through the house into the
garden behind. On each side of the entrance was a sitting-room about
sixteen feet square and beyond them were the offices and the stairs.
Four bedrooms and two garrets formed the rest of the house. It had
not been built many years and was in good repair.” But as _Sense and
Sensibility_ was written long before Jane went to live at Chawton, it
is possible this account of the cottage was interpolated later, perhaps
when she revised the book for publication in 1811.

On the whole, though interesting enough, _Sense and Sensibility_
does not take very high rank among the novels. _Northanger Abbey_ was
begun in 1798, soon after the completion of _Sense and Sensibility_,
and, unlike its predecessors, it does not seem to have been based
on existing MSS., but to have been written as we now have it, though
the writing was spread over a long period. It is the one of all Miss
Austen’s novels about which opinions differ most. It was written
avowedly as a skit on the romantic school, whose high priestess was
Mrs. Radcliffe; but, as Mr. Austin Dobson says: “The ironical treatment
is not always apparent, and there are indications that, as often
happens, the author’s growing interest in the characters diverts her
from her purpose.” This is true enough, and the book certainly improves
in consequence as it goes on, for at first it is sententious, and the
author talks aside to her readers and explains her characters in a
way that she does nowhere else. Archbishop Whateley remarks that it is
“decidedly inferior to her other works—yet the same kind of excellences
that characterise the other novels may be perceived in this to a degree
which would have been highly creditable to most other writers of the
same school, and which would have entitled the author to considerable
praise had she written nothing better.”

The scene of _Northanger Abbey_ is laid in Bath, and it is easy to see
how very well acquainted not only with the topography, but with the
manners of Bath, Jane was. The chattering and running to and fro from
Pump rooms to Upper or Lower Assembly rooms, the continual meetings,
and the saunterings in the streets, with all the affected or real
gaiety, and the magnifying of trifles, are cleverly sketched in the
earlier part of the book. The sincere but foolish little heroine,
with her contrast to and intense admiration for her silly and selfish
friend, Isabella Thorpe, is a life-like figure. Her mother is one of
the very few elderly ladies who are allowed to be sensible in Jane’s
books, and she comes in so little as to be a very minor figure.

The account of Bath society is one of the principal features of the
book, another is that it abounds, perhaps more than any of the rest,
in those three or four line summaries which express so admirably
reflections, situations, and characters. Mrs. Thorpe’s “eldest daughter
has great personal beauty; and the younger ones by pretending to be as
handsome as their sister, imitating her air, and dressing in the same
style, did very well.” “Mrs. Allen was now quite happy, quite satisfied
with Bath. She had found some acquaintance—and as the completion
of good fortune, had found these friends by no means so expensively
dressed as herself.” “Her [Catherine’s] whole family were plain matter
of fact people, who seldom aimed at wit of any kind; her father at the
utmost being contented with a pun, and her mother with a proverb.”

“The advantages of natural folly in a beautiful girl have been already
set forth by the capital pen of a sister author, and to her treatment
of the subject I will only add, in justice to men, that though, to the
larger and more trifling part of the sex, imbecility in females is a
great enhancement of their personal charms, there is a portion of them
too reasonable, and too well informed themselves to desire anything
more in woman than ignorance.”

The rattle-pate Miss Thorpe is sketched with particular care, and if
we may judge from other contemporary novels, including _Cecilia_, this
was by no means an uncommon type at that day. Her conversation with
Catherine on the novels she had read is worth giving at length. She
asks: “‘Have you gone on with _Udolpho_?’

“‘Yes, I have been reading it ever since I woke; and I am got to the
black veil.’

“‘Are you indeed? How delightful! Oh, I would not tell you what is
behind the black veil for the world! Are not you wild to know?’

“‘Oh yes, quite! what can it be? But do not tell me, I would not be
told on any account. I know it must be a skeleton, I am sure it is
Laurentina’s skeleton! Oh! I am delighted with the book! I should like
to spend my whole life in reading it, I assure you; if it had not been
to meet you I would not have come away from it for all the world.’

“‘Dear creature! How much I am obliged to you; and when you have
finished _Udolpho_ we will read the _Italian_ together; and I have made
out a list of ten or twelve more of the same kind for you.’

“‘Have you indeed? How glad I am! Where are they all?’

“‘I will read you their names directly, here they are in my
pocket-book. _Castle of Wolfenbach_, _Clermont_, _Mysterious Warnings_,
_Necromancer of the Black Forest_, _Midnight Bell_, _Orphan of the
Rhine_, and _Horrid Mysteries_. Those will last us some time.’

“‘Yes, pretty well; but are they all horrid, are you sure they are all
horrid?’

“‘Yes, quite sure; for a particular friend of mine—a Miss Andrews—a
sweet girl, one of the sweetest creatures in the world, has read every
one of them. I wish you knew Miss Andrews, you would be delighted with
her. She is netting herself the sweetest cloak you can conceive. I
think her as beautiful as an angel, and I am so vexed with the men for
not admiring her! I scold them all amazingly for it.’

“‘Scold them! Do you scold them for not admiring her?’

“‘Yes, that I do. There is nothing I would not do for those who really
are my friends. I have no notion of loving people by halves, it is
not my nature. My attachments are always excessively strong. I told
Captain Hunt at one of our assemblies this winter, that if he was to
tease me all night, I would not dance with him unless he would allow
Miss Andrews to be as beautiful as an angel. The men think us incapable
of real friendship you know, and I am determined to show them the
difference.’”

And shortly after she exclaims, “‘For Heaven’s sake! let us move away
from this end of the room. Do you know there are two odious young men
who have been staring at me this half hour. They really put me quite
out of countenance! Let us go and look at the arrivals, they will
hardly follow us there.’

“In a few moments Catherine with unaffected pleasure assured her that
she need not be any longer uneasy, as the gentlemen had just left the
Pump room.

“‘And which way are they gone?’ said Isabella, turning hastily round.
‘One was a very good-looking young man.’

“‘They went towards the churchyard.’

“‘Well, I am amazingly glad I have got rid of them! And now, what say
you to going to Edgar’s Buildings with me and looking at my new hat?
You said you should like to see it.’

   [Illustration: COWPER]

“Catherine readily agreed. ‘Only,’ she added, ‘perhaps we may overtake
the two young men.’

“‘Oh! never mind that! If we make haste we shall pass by them
presently, and I am dying to show you my hat.’

“‘But if we only wait a few minutes there will be no danger of our
seeing them at all.’

“‘I shall not pay them any such compliment, I assure you. I have no
notion of treating men with such respect. That is the way to spoil
them.’

“Catherine had nothing to oppose against such reasoning, and therefore
to show the independence of Miss Thorpe and her resolution of humbling
the sex, they set off immediately as fast as they could walk in pursuit
of the two young men.”

Perhaps _Northanger Abbey_ may be described as the book which real
Austenites appreciate most, but which the casual reader does not
admire. The story is not interesting, the simplicity of Catherine
rather irritating than attractive, and it is the form and the flashes
of insight in the book that make it so enjoyable.

The writing, though begun in 1798, spread over a long period, for
the book was not finished until 1803, by which time Jane herself
was settled in Bath. It was then offered to a Bath bookseller, the
equivalent of a publisher in our day. He gave ten pounds for it,
probably because of the local colour, but evidently after reading it he
found it lacked that melodramatic flavour to which he was accustomed;
and it is also highly probable that he did not at all comprehend the
delightful flavour of irony. The book remained with him, luckily in
safety, until thirteen years had passed, when it was bought back by
Henry Austen on his sister’s account for the same sum that had been
given for it. When the transaction had been completed he told the
bookseller that it was by the author of _Sense and Sensibility_, which
had attracted much attention, whereat the man must have experienced the
regret he deserved to feel, as he had missed the honour of introducing
Jane to the public, an honour that would have linked his name with
genius.

The book did not appear until 1818, when the author was in her grave,
and it was the first to bear her name on the title-page. It was
published in one volume with the last of her writings, _Persuasion_.
In a preface written before her death, she says of _Northanger
Abbey_—Thirteen years have made it “comparatively obsolete, places,
manners, books, and opinions have undergone considerable changes.” It
is evident, therefore, she did not attempt to bring it up to date. This
preface is prefixed to the first edition, as is also the biographical
Memoir by her brother which has already been referred to.

The few closing years of the eighteenth century, the last spent at
Steventon, while these three works were in hand, must have been bright
ones to Jane; she had found an outlet for all the vivacious humour
that was in her, and must have lived in the world of fancy with her
characters, which were all very real to her, quite as much as in the
material world.

At this time her eldest brother James was living not far off, and
on November 8, 1796, his wife had become the mother of a boy, named
Edward. It was he who afterwards took the additional name of Leigh,
affixed to that of Austen, and who published the Memoir of Jane Austen
from which we have already drawn so much interesting detail. How little
could Jane have dreamt that night when her brother sent over a note
to tell her of the child’s safe arrival in the world, that more than
a hundred years later the work of that boy, describing her as one of
the world’s famous authoresses, would be read eagerly. It was only
the preceding month that she had begun to work on the first of her
delightful books. When she went to see the new baby she was allowed
a glimpse of him while he was asleep, and was told that his eyes were
“large, dark, and handsome.” What a subject for a picture! She in her
girlishness, quaintly dressed, bending over the cot of the infant,
quite as unconscious of all that was to come as even the baby itself!